<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!-- -*- DocBook -*- -->
<!-- vim:set tw=0 ts=8 et: -->
<!DOCTYPE book PUBLIC "-//OASIS//DTD DocBook XML V4.5//EN" 
"http://www.oasis-open.org/docbook/xml/4.5/docbookx.dtd" [
<!ENTITY % trans    SYSTEM "po4a/maint-guide.en.ent">   %trans;
<!ENTITY % common   SYSTEM "common.ent">   %common;
<!ENTITY % version  SYSTEM "version.ent">  %version;
]>
<book lang="en">
<!-- This is UTF-8 encoded. -->
<!--
This file has been reorganized to make this document robust for translation 
when some externally referenced information changes.

If you want to add extra contents to this document, please do so by
 * adding tag like &othercredit; in English and provide it for each language.
 * add extra content within msgstr but within <footnote>...</footnote>

Please note there will be content checker to match tags of msgid and msgstr.
The second rule is a way to get exception to this rule.

Please try to correct something in translation.  If you think contents needs fix,
Let's fix it in the root cause.

Please do not use TAB in this file.

Please understand to keep this document focused.  Not everything you think important 
for the new maintainer should be written down.  Something social needs to be elsewhere.
Some thing should be left to the practice.  Something needs to be left for exercise 
for people to check official documentations.
-->
<title>Debian New Maintainers' Guide</title>
<bookinfo>
<authorgroup>
<!-- Do not use firstname and surname tags it braks Japanese.  -->
<!-- The same with othercredit -->
<author> <personname>Josip Rodin</personname> <email>joy-mg@debian.org</email> <contrib>original contents</contrib> </author>
<author> <personname>Osamu Aoki</personname> <email>osamu@debian.org</email> <contrib>updated contents</contrib> </author>
<!-- translator credits in po4a/translator.*.ent -->
&othercredit;
</authorgroup>
<releaseinfo>version &docversion;</releaseinfo>
<pubdate>&docisodate;</pubdate>
<copyright><year>1998-2002</year> <holder>Josip Rodin</holder></copyright>
<copyright><year>2005-2011</year> <holder>Osamu Aoki</holder></copyright>
<copyright><year>2010</year>      <holder>Craig Small</holder></copyright>
<copyright><year>2010</year>      <holder>Raphaël Hertzog</holder></copyright>
<legalnotice>
<para>
This document may be used under the terms the GNU General Public License
version 2 or higher.
</para>
<para>
This document was made using these two documents as examples:
</para>
<itemizedlist>
<listitem>
<para>
Making a Debian Package (AKA the Debmake Manual), copyright © 1997 Jaldhar
Vyas.
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
The New-Maintainer's Debian Packaging Howto, copyright © 1997 Will Lowe.
</para>
</listitem>
</itemizedlist>
</legalnotice>
<!-- toc -->
</bookinfo>
<chapter id="start"><title>Getting started The Right Way</title>
<para>
This document tries to describe the building of a Debian package to ordinary
Debian users and prospective developers.  It uses fairly non-technical language, and
it's well covered with working examples.  There is an old Latin saying:
<emphasis>Longum iter est per praecepta, breve et efficax per
exempla</emphasis> (It's a long way by the rules, but short and efficient with
examples).
</para>
<para>
This document has been updated for the Debian <literal>&base-release;</literal>
release.
<footnote><para> The document assumes you are using a
<literal>&base-release;</literal> or newer system.  If you need to follow this
text in an older system (including an older Ubuntu system etc.), you must
install backported <systemitem role="package">dpkg</systemitem> and 
<systemitem role="package">debhelper</systemitem> packages, at least.
</para> </footnote>
</para>
<para>
One of the things that makes Debian such a top-notch distribution is its
package system.  While there is a vast quantity of software already in the
Debian format, sometimes you need to install software that isn't.  You may be
wondering how you can make your own packages; and perhaps you think it is a very
difficult task.  Well, if you are a real novice on Linux, it is hard, but if
you were a rookie, you wouldn't be reading this document now&nbsp;:-)
You do need to know a little about Unix programming but you certainly
don't need to be a wizard.
<footnote><para>
You can learn about the basic handling of a Debian system from the
<ulink url="&debref;">Debian Reference</ulink>.  It contains some pointers to
learn about Unix programming, too.
</para></footnote>
</para>
<para>
One thing is certain, though: to properly create and maintain Debian packages
takes many hours.  Make no mistake, for our system to work the maintainers
need to be both technically competent and diligent.
</para>
<para>
If you need some help on packaging, please read <xref linkend="helpme"/>.
</para>
<para>
Newer versions of this document should always be available online at 
<ulink url="&maint-guide;"/> and in the 
<systemitem role="package">maint-guide</systemitem> package.
The translations may be available in packages such as
<systemitem role="package">maint-guide-es</systemitem>.
Please note that this documentation may be slightly outdated.
</para>
<para>
Since this is a tutorial, I choose to explain each detailed step for some
important topics.  Some of them may look irrelevant to you.  Please be patient.
I have also intentionally skipped some corner cases and provided only pointers
to keep this document simple.
</para>
<section id="socialdynamics"><title>Social dynamics of Debian</title>
<para>
Here are some observations of Debian's social dynamics, presented in the hope
that it will prepare you for interactions with Debian.
</para>
<itemizedlist>
<listitem><para>We all are volunteers.</para>
<itemizedlist>
<listitem><para>You cannot impose on others what to do.</para></listitem>
<listitem><para>You should be motivated to do things by yourself.</para></listitem>
</itemizedlist></listitem>
<listitem><para>Friendly cooperation is the driving force.</para>
<itemizedlist>
<listitem><para>Your contribution should not overstrain others.</para></listitem>
<listitem><para>Your contribution is valuable only when others appreciate it.</para></listitem>
</itemizedlist></listitem>
<listitem><para>Debian is not your school where you get automatic attention of teachers.</para>
<itemizedlist>
<listitem><para>You should be able to learn many things by yourself.</para></listitem>
<listitem><para>Attention from other volunteers is a very scarce resource.</para></listitem>
</itemizedlist></listitem>
<listitem><para>Debian is constantly improving.</para>
<itemizedlist>
<listitem><para>You are expected to make high quality packages.</para></listitem>
<listitem><para>You should adapt yourself to change.</para></listitem>
</itemizedlist></listitem>
</itemizedlist>
<para>
There are several types of people interacting around Debian with different
roles.
</para>
<itemizedlist>
<listitem>
<para>
<emphasis role="strong">upstream author</emphasis>: the person who made the
original program.
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
<emphasis role="strong">upstream maintainer</emphasis>: the person who
currently maintains the program.
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
<emphasis role="strong">maintainer</emphasis>: the person making the Debian
package of the program.
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
<emphasis role="strong">sponsor</emphasis>: a person who helps maintainers to
upload packages to the official Debian package archive (after checking their
contents).
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
<emphasis role="strong">mentor</emphasis>: a person who helps novice
maintainers with packaging etc.
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
<emphasis role="strong">Debian Developer</emphasis> (DD): a member of
the Debian project with full upload rights to the official Debian package
archive.
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
<emphasis role="strong">Debian Maintainer</emphasis> (DM): a person with
limited upload rights to the official Debian package archive.
</para>
</listitem>
</itemizedlist>
<para>
Please note that you cannot become an official
<emphasis role="strong">Debian Developer</emphasis> (DD) overnight, because it
takes more than technical skill.  Please do not be discouraged by this.  If it
is useful to others, you can still upload your package either as a 
<emphasis role="strong">maintainer</emphasis> through a 
<emphasis role="strong">sponsor</emphasis> or as a 
<emphasis role="strong">Debian Maintainer</emphasis>.
</para>
<para>
Please note that you do not need to create any new package to become an
official Debian Developer.  Contributing to the existing packages can provide a
path to becoming an official Debian Developer too.  There are many packages
waiting for good maintainers (see <xref linkend="choose"/>).
</para>
<para>
Since we focus only on technical aspects of packaging in this document,
please refer to the following to learn how Debian functions and how you can get involved.
</para>
<itemizedlist>
<listitem><para><ulink url="&logiciellibre;">Debian: 17 years of Free Software, "do-ocracy", and democracy</ulink> (Introductory slides) </para> </listitem>
<listitem><para><ulink url="&debianorghelp;">How can you help Debian?</ulink> (official) </para> </listitem>
<listitem><para><ulink url="&debianfaqhelp;">The Debian GNU/Linux FAQ, Chapter 13 - "Contributing to the Debian Project"</ulink> (semi-official) </para> </listitem>
<listitem><para><ulink url="&debianwikihelp;">Debian Wiki, HelpDebian</ulink> (supplemental) </para> </listitem>
<listitem><para><ulink url="&nm-do;">Debian New Member site</ulink> (official) </para> </listitem>
<listitem><para><ulink url="&debianmentorfaq;">Debian Mentors FAQ</ulink> (supplemental) </para> </listitem>
</itemizedlist>
</section>
<section id="needprogs"><title>Programs needed for development</title>
<para>
Before you start anything, you should make sure that you have properly
installed some additional packages needed for development.  Note that the list
doesn't contain any packages marked <literal>essential</literal> or
<literal>required</literal> - we expect that you have those installed already.
</para>
<para>
The following packages come with the standard Debian installation, so you
probably have them already (along with any additional packages they depend on).
Still, you should check it with <literal>aptitude show
<replaceable>package</replaceable></literal>
or with <literal>dpkg -s <replaceable>package</replaceable></literal>.
</para>
<para>
The most important package to install on your development system is the
<systemitem role="package">build-essential</systemitem> package.  Once you try
to install that, it will <emphasis>pull in</emphasis> other packages required to
have a basic build environment.
</para>
<para>
For some types of packages, that is all you will require; however, there is
another set of packages that while not essential for all package builds are
useful to have installed or may be required by your package:
</para>
<itemizedlist>
<listitem>
<para>
<systemitem role="package">autoconf</systemitem>, <systemitem
role="package">automake</systemitem>, and <systemitem
role="package">autotools-dev</systemitem> - many newer programs use configure
scripts and <filename>Makefile</filename> files preprocessed with the help of
programs like these (see <literal>info autoconf</literal>, <literal>info
automake</literal>).  <systemitem role="package">autotools-dev</systemitem>
keeps up-to-date versions of certain auto files and has documentation about the
best way to use those files.
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
<systemitem role="package">debhelper</systemitem> and
<systemitem role="package">dh-make</systemitem> -
<systemitem role="package">dh-make</systemitem> is necessary to create
the skeleton of our example package, and it will use some of the
<systemitem role="package">debhelper</systemitem> tools for creating
packages.  They are not essential for this purpose, but are
<emphasis>highly</emphasis> recommended for new maintainers.  It makes
the whole process very much easier to start, and to control afterwards.
(See <citerefentry> <refentrytitle>dh_make</refentrytitle>
<manvolnum>8</manvolnum> </citerefentry>, <citerefentry>
<refentrytitle>debhelper</refentrytitle> <manvolnum>1</manvolnum>
</citerefentry>.) <footnote><para> There are also some more specialized
but similar packages such as
<systemitem role="package">dh-make-perl</systemitem>,
<systemitem role="package">dh-make-php</systemitem>, etc.  </para>
</footnote>
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
<systemitem role="package">devscripts</systemitem> - this package contains some
useful scripts that can be helpful for maintainers, but they are also
not necessary for building packages.  Packages recommended and suggested
by this package are worth looking into.  (See <filename>&devscripts-readme;</filename>.)
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
<systemitem role="package">fakeroot</systemitem> - this utility lets you
emulate being root which is necessary for some parts of the build process.
(See <citerefentry> <refentrytitle>fakeroot</refentrytitle>
<manvolnum>1</manvolnum> </citerefentry>.)
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
<systemitem role="package">file</systemitem> - this handy program can determine
what type a file is.  (See <citerefentry> <refentrytitle>file</refentrytitle>
<manvolnum>1</manvolnum> </citerefentry>.)
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
<systemitem role="package">gfortran</systemitem> - the GNU Fortran 95 compiler,
necessary if your program is written in Fortran.  (See <citerefentry>
<refentrytitle>gfortran</refentrytitle> <manvolnum>1</manvolnum>
</citerefentry>.)
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
<systemitem role="package">git</systemitem> - this package provides a popular
version control system designed to handle very large projects with speed and
efficiency; it is used for many high profile open source projects, most notably
the Linux kernel.  (See <citerefentry> <refentrytitle>git</refentrytitle>
<manvolnum>1</manvolnum> </citerefentry>,
git Manual (<filename>&git-doc;</filename>).)
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
<systemitem role="package">gnupg</systemitem> - a tool that enables you to
digitally <emphasis>sign</emphasis> packages.  This is especially important if
you want to distribute it to other people, and you will certainly be doing that
when your work gets included in the Debian distribution.  (See <citerefentry>
<refentrytitle>gpg</refentrytitle> <manvolnum>1</manvolnum> </citerefentry>.)
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
<systemitem role="package">gpc</systemitem> - the GNU Pascal compiler,
necessary if your program is written in Pascal.  Worthy of note here is
<systemitem role="package">fp-compiler</systemitem>, the Free Pascal Compiler,
which is also good at this task.  (See <citerefentry>
<refentrytitle>gpc</refentrytitle> <manvolnum>1</manvolnum> </citerefentry>,
<citerefentry> <refentrytitle>ppc386</refentrytitle>
<manvolnum>1</manvolnum> </citerefentry>.)
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
<systemitem role="package">lintian</systemitem> - this is the Debian package
checker, which can let you know of any common mistakes after you build the
package, and explains the errors found.  (See <citerefentry>
<refentrytitle>lintian</refentrytitle> <manvolnum>1</manvolnum>
</citerefentry>,
<ulink url="&lintian-doc;">Lintian User's Manual</ulink>.)
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
<systemitem role="package">patch</systemitem> - this very useful utility will
take a file containing a difference listing (produced by the
<command>diff</command> program) and apply it to the original file, producing a
patched version.  (See <citerefentry> <refentrytitle>patch</refentrytitle>
<manvolnum>1</manvolnum> </citerefentry>.)
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
<systemitem role="package">patchutils</systemitem> - this package contains some
utilities to work with patches such as the <command>lsdiff</command>,
<command>interdiff</command> and <command>filterdiff</command> commands.
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
<systemitem role="package">pbuilder</systemitem> - this package contains
programs which are used for creating and maintaining <command>chroot</command>
environment.  Building Debian package in this <command>chroot</command>
environment verifies the proper build dependency and avoid FTBFS (Fails To
Build From Source) bugs.  (see <citerefentry>
<refentrytitle>pbuilder</refentrytitle> <manvolnum>8</manvolnum>
</citerefentry> and <citerefentry> <refentrytitle>pdebuild</refentrytitle>
<manvolnum>1</manvolnum> </citerefentry>)
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
<systemitem role="package">perl</systemitem> - Perl is one of the most used
interpreted scripting languages on today's Unix-like systems, often referred to
as Unix's Swiss Army Chainsaw. (See <citerefentry>
<refentrytitle>perl</refentrytitle> <manvolnum>1</manvolnum> </citerefentry>.)
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
<systemitem role="package">python</systemitem> - Python is another of the most
used interpreted scripting languages on the Debian system, combining
remarkable power with very clear syntax. (See <citerefentry>
<refentrytitle>python</refentrytitle> <manvolnum>1</manvolnum> </citerefentry>.)
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
<systemitem role="package">quilt</systemitem> - this package helps you to
manage large numbers of patches by keeping track of the changes each patch
makes. Patches can be applied, un-applied, refreshed, and more.  (See
<citerefentry> <refentrytitle>quilt</refentrytitle> <manvolnum>1</manvolnum></citerefentry>, 
and <filename>&quilt-pdf;</filename>.)
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
<systemitem role="package">xutils-dev</systemitem> - some programs, usually
those made for X11, also use these programs to generate
<filename>Makefile</filename> files from sets of macro functions.  (See
<citerefentry> <refentrytitle>imake</refentrytitle> <manvolnum>1</manvolnum>
</citerefentry>, <citerefentry> <refentrytitle>xmkmf</refentrytitle>
<manvolnum>1</manvolnum> </citerefentry>.)
</para>
</listitem>
</itemizedlist>
<para>
The short descriptions that are given above only serve to introduce you to what
each package does.  Before continuing please read the documentation
of each relevant program including ones installed through the package dependency such as 
<command>make</command>, at least, for the standard usage.  It may seem like heavy
going now, but later on you'll be <emphasis>very</emphasis> glad you read it.
If you have specific questions later, I would suggest re-reading the documents
mentioned above.
</para>
</section>
<section id="needdocs"><title>Documentation needed for development</title>
<para>
The following is the <emphasis>very important</emphasis> documentation which
you should read along with this document:
</para>
<itemizedlist>
<listitem>
<para>
<systemitem role="package">debian-policy</systemitem> - the <ulink url="&debian-policy;">Debian Policy
Manual</ulink> includes explanations of the structure and contents of the
Debian archive, several OS design issues, the <ulink url="&fhs;">Filesystem Hierarchy Standard</ulink>
(FHS, which says where each file and directory should be), etc.  For you, the most
important thing is that it describes requirements that each package must
satisfy to be included in the distribution. (See the local copies of
<filename>&policy-pdf;</filename> and <filename>&fhs-pdf;</filename>.)
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
<systemitem role="package">developers-reference</systemitem> 
- the <ulink url="&developers-reference;">Debian Developer's Reference</ulink> 
describes all matters not specifically about the technical
details of packaging, like the structure of the archive, how to rename, orphan,
or adopt packages, how to do NMUs, how to manage bugs, best packaging practices,
when and where to upload etc.  (See the local copy of
<filename>&developers-refpdf;</filename>.)
</para>
</listitem>
</itemizedlist>
<para>
The following is the <emphasis>important</emphasis> documentation which
you should read along with this document:
</para>
<itemizedlist>
<listitem>
<para>
<ulink url="&autotools-tutorial;">Autotools
Tutorial</ulink> provides a very good tutorial for <ulink url="&gnu-build-system;">the GNU Build System known
as the GNU Autotools</ulink> whose most important components are Autoconf,
Automake, Libtool, and gettext.
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
<systemitem role="package">gnu-standards</systemitem> - this package contains
two pieces of documentation from the GNU project: 
<ulink url="&gnu-standard;">GNU Coding Standards</ulink>, and 
<ulink url="&gnu-maintainer;">Information for Maintainers of GNU Software</ulink>.
Although Debian does not require these to
be followed, these are still helpful as guidelines and common sense.
(See the local copies of
<filename>&gnu-standard-pdf;</filename> and
<filename>&gnu-maintainer-pdf;</filename>.)
</para>
</listitem>
</itemizedlist>
<para>
If this document contradicts any of the documents mentioned above, they
are correct.  Please file a bug report on the
<systemitem role="package">maint-guide</systemitem> package using
<command>reportbug</command>.
</para>
<para>
The following is an alternative tutorial documentation which you may
read along with this document:
</para>
<itemizedlist>
<listitem><para><ulink url="&debpkg-tutorial0;">Debian Packaging Tutorial</ulink></para></listitem>
</itemizedlist>
</section>
<section id="helpme"><title>Where to ask for help</title>
<para>
Before you decide to ask your question in some public place, please read the fine documentation.
</para>
<itemizedlist>
<listitem>
<para>
files in <filename>/usr/share/doc/<replaceable>package</replaceable></filename> for all pertinent packages
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
contents of <literal><command>man</command> <replaceable>command</replaceable></literal> for all pertinent commands
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
contents of <literal><command>info</command> <replaceable>command</replaceable></literal> for all pertinent commands
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
contents of <ulink url="&debian-mentors-ldo;">debian-mentors@lists.debian.org mailing list archive</ulink>
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
contents of <ulink url="&debian-devel-ldo;">debian-devel@lists.debian.org mailing list archive</ulink>
</para>
</listitem>
</itemizedlist>
<para>
You can use web search engines more effectively by including search strings
such as <literal>site:lists.debian.org</literal> to limit the domain.
</para>
<para>
Making a small test package is a good way to learn details of packaging.
Inspecting existing well maintained packages is the best way to learn how other
people make packages.
</para>
<para>
If you still have questions about packaging that you couldn't find answers to
in the available documentation and web resources, you can ask them interactively.
</para>
<itemizedlist>
<listitem>
<para>
<ulink url="&debian-mentors-ldo;">debian-mentors@lists.debian.org mailing list</ulink>. (This mailing list is for the novice.)
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
<ulink url="&debian-devel-ldo;">debian-devel@lists.debian.org mailing list</ulink>. (This mailing list is for the expert.)
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
<ulink url="&irc-debian;">IRC</ulink> such as <literal>#debian-mentors</literal>.
</para>
</listitem>
</itemizedlist>
<para>
The more experienced Debian developers will gladly help you, if you ask
properly after making your required efforts.
</para>
<para>
When you receive a bug report (yes, actual bug reports!), you will know that it
is time for you to dig into the 
<ulink url="&bts;">Debian Bug Tracking System</ulink> 
and read the documentation there, to be able to
deal with the reports efficiently.  I highly recommend reading the 
<ulink url="&devref-bug-handling;">Debian Developer's Reference, 5.8.
"Handling bugs"</ulink>.
</para>
<para>
Even if it all worked well, it's time to start praying.  Why?  Because in just
a few hours (or days) users from all around the world will start to use your
package, and if you made some critical error you'll get mailbombed by numerous
angry Debian users...  Just kidding.  :-)
</para>
<para>
Relax and be ready for bug reports, because there is a lot more work to be done
before your package will be fully in line with Debian policies and its best
practice guidelines (once again, read the <emphasis>real
documentation</emphasis> for details).  Good luck!
</para>
</section>
</chapter>
<chapter id="first"><title>First steps</title>
<para>
Let's start by creating a package of your own (or, even better,
adopting an existing one).
</para>
<section id="workflow"><title>Debian package building workflow</title>
<para>
If you are making a Debian package with an upstream program, the
typical workflow of Debian package building involves generating several
specifically named files for each step as follows.
</para>
<itemizedlist>
<listitem>
<para>Get a copy of the upstream software, usually in a compressed tar format.</para>
<itemizedlist>
<listitem><literal><replaceable>package</replaceable>-<replaceable>version</replaceable>.tar.gz</literal></listitem>
</itemizedlist>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
Add Debian-specific packaging modifications to the upstream program under the
<filename>debian</filename> directory, and create a non-native source package
(that is, the set of input files used for Debian package building) in
<literal>3.0 (quilt)</literal> format.
</para>
<itemizedlist>
<listitem><literal><replaceable>package</replaceable>_<replaceable>version</replaceable>.orig.tar.gz</literal></listitem>
<listitem><literal><replaceable>package</replaceable>_<replaceable>version</replaceable>-<replaceable>revision</replaceable>.debian.tar.gz</literal>
<footnote><para>For the older style of non-native Debian source packages in <literal>1.0</literal> format,
<literal><replaceable>package</replaceable>_<replaceable>version</replaceable>-<replaceable>revision</replaceable>.diff.gz</literal>
is used instead. </para></footnote></listitem>
<listitem><literal><replaceable>package</replaceable>_<replaceable>version</replaceable>-<replaceable>revision</replaceable>.dsc</literal></listitem>
</itemizedlist>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
Build Debian binary packages, which are ordinary installable package files in <literal>.deb</literal> format (or <literal>.udeb</literal> format, used by the Debian Installer) from the Debian source package.
</para>
<itemizedlist>
<listitem><literal><replaceable>package</replaceable>_<replaceable>version</replaceable>-<replaceable>revision</replaceable>_<replaceable>arch</replaceable>.deb</literal></listitem>
</itemizedlist>
</listitem>
</itemizedlist>
<para>
Please note that the character separating
<literal><replaceable>package</replaceable></literal> and
<literal><replaceable>version</replaceable></literal> was changed from
<literal>-</literal> (hyphen) in the tarball name to
<literal>_</literal> (underscore) in the Debian package filenames.
</para>
<para>
In the file names above, replace
the <literal><replaceable>package</replaceable></literal> part with the <emphasis role="strong">package name</emphasis>,
the <literal><replaceable>version</replaceable></literal> part with the <emphasis role="strong">upstream version</emphasis>,
the <literal><replaceable>revision</replaceable></literal> part with the <emphasis role="strong">Debian revision</emphasis>,
and the <literal><replaceable>arch</replaceable></literal> part with the <emphasis role="strong">package architecture</emphasis>,
as defined in the Debian Policy Manual.
<footnote> <para> See
<ulink url="&policy-source;">5.6.1 "Source"</ulink>, 
<ulink url="&policy-package;">5.6.7 "Package"</ulink>, and
<ulink url="&policy-version;">5.6.12 "Version"</ulink>.  
The <emphasis role="strong">package architecture</emphasis> follows the
<ulink url="&policy-architecture;">Debian Policy Manual, 5.6.8 "Architecture"</ulink> 
and is automatically assigned by the package build process.</para></footnote>
</para>
<para>
If instead you are making a Debian-specific package with no upstream, the
typical workflow of Debian package building is simpler.
</para>
<itemizedlist>
<listitem>
<para>
Create a native Debian source package in the <literal>3.0 (native)</literal>
format using a single compressed tar file in which all files are included.
</para>
<itemizedlist>
<listitem><literal><replaceable>package</replaceable>_<replaceable>version</replaceable>.tar.gz</literal></listitem>
<listitem><literal><replaceable>package</replaceable>_<replaceable>version</replaceable>.dsc</literal></listitem>
</itemizedlist>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
Build Debian binary packages from the native Debian source package.
</para>
<itemizedlist>
<listitem><literal><replaceable>package</replaceable>_<replaceable>version</replaceable>_<replaceable>arch</replaceable>.deb</literal></listitem>
</itemizedlist>
</listitem>
</itemizedlist>
<para>
Each step of this outline is explained with detailed examples in later sections.
</para>
</section>
<section id="choose"><title>Choose your program</title>
<para>
You have probably chosen the package you want to create.  The first thing you
need to do is check if the package is in the distribution archive already by
using the following.
</para>
<itemizedlist>
<listitem>
<para>the <command>aptitude</command> command</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>the <ulink url="&packages-do;">Debian packages</ulink> web page</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>the <ulink url="&packages-qa-do;">Debian Package Tracking System</ulink> web page</para>
</listitem>
</itemizedlist>
<para>
If the package already exists, well, install it!  :-) If it happens to be
<emphasis role="strong">orphaned</emphasis> (that is, if its
maintainer is set to <ulink url="&qa-do;">Debian QA Group</ulink>),
you may be able to pick it up if it's still available.  You may also
adopt a package whose maintainer has filed a Request for Adoption
(<emphasis role="strong">RFA</emphasis>).<footnote> <para>See
<ulink url="&devref-adopt;">Debian Developer's Reference 5.9.5.
"Adopting a package"</ulink>.</para> </footnote>
</para>
<para>
There are several package ownership status resources.
</para>
<itemizedlist>
<listitem>
<para> <ulink url="&wnpp-do;">Work-Needing and Prospective Packages</ulink> </para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para> <ulink url="&wnpp-bts;">Debian Bug report logs: Bugs in pseudo-package <systemitem role="package">wnpp</systemitem> in <literal>unstable</literal></ulink> </para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para> <ulink url="&wnpp-dn;">Debian Packages that Need Lovin'</ulink> </para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para> <ulink url="&wnpp-debtags;">Browse <systemitem role="package">wnpp</systemitem> bugs based on debtags</ulink> </para>
</listitem>
</itemizedlist>
<para>
As a side note, it's important to point out that Debian already has packages
for most kinds of programs, and the number of packages already in the Debian
archive is much larger than that of contributors with upload rights.  Thus,
contributions to packages already in the archive are far more appreciated (and
more likely to receive sponsorship) by other developers <footnote><para> Having
said that, there will of course always be new programs that are worth
packaging.  </para> </footnote>.  You can contribute in various ways.
</para>
<itemizedlist>
<listitem>
<para>
taking over orphaned, yet actively used, packages
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
joining <ulink url="&teams;">packaging teams</ulink>
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
triaging bugs of very popular packages
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
preparing <ulink url="&devref-nmu;">QA or NMU uploads</ulink>
</para>
</listitem>
</itemizedlist>
<para>
If you are able to adopt the package, get the sources (with something like
<literal>apt-get source <replaceable>packagename</replaceable></literal>) and
examine them.  This document unfortunately doesn't include comprehensive
information about adopting packages.  Thankfully you shouldn't have a hard time
figuring out how the package works since someone has already done the initial
setup for you.  Keep reading, though; a lot of the advice below will still be
applicable for your case.
</para>
<para>
If the package is new, and you decide you'd like to see it in Debian, proceed
as follows:
</para>
<itemizedlist>
<listitem>
<para>
First, you must know that the program works, and have tried it for some time to
confirm its usefulness.
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
You must check that no one else is already working on the package on the
<ulink url="&wnpp-do;">Work-Needing and Prospective Packages</ulink> site.  
If no one else is working on it, file an ITP (Intent
To Package) bug report to the <systemitem role="package">wnpp</systemitem>
pseudo-package using <command>reportbug</command>.  If someone's already on it,
contact them if you feel you need to.  If not - find another interesting
program that nobody is maintaining.
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
The software <emphasis role="strong">must have a license</emphasis>.
</para>
<itemizedlist>
<listitem>
<para>
For the <literal>main</literal> section, Debian Policy requires it
<emphasis role="strong">to be fully compliant with the Debian Free Software
Guidelines</emphasis> (<ulink url="&dfsg;">DFSG</ulink>)
and <emphasis role="strong">not to require a package outside of
<literal>main</literal></emphasis> for compilation or execution.  This
is the desired case.
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
For the <literal>contrib</literal> section, it must comply with the
DFSG but it may require a package outside of <literal>main</literal> for
compilation or execution.
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
For the <literal>non-free</literal> section, it may be non-compliant
with the DFSG but it <emphasis role="strong">must be distributable</emphasis>.
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
If you are unsure about where it should go, post the license text on 
<ulink url="&debian-legal-ldo;">debian-legal@lists.debian.org</ulink>
and ask for advice.
</para>
</listitem>
</itemizedlist>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
The program should <emphasis role="strong">not</emphasis> introduce security
and maintenance concerns to the Debian system.
</para>
<itemizedlist>
<listitem>
<para>
The program should be well documented and its code needs to be understandable
(i.e.  not obfuscated).
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
You should contact the program's author(s) to check if they agree with packaging it
and are amicable to Debian.  It is important to be able to consult with the author(s)
in case of any problems with the program, so don't try to package
unmaintained software.
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
The program certainly should <emphasis role="strong">not</emphasis> run setuid
root, or even better, it shouldn't need to be setuid or setgid to anything.
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
The program should not be a daemon, or go in an
<filename>*/sbin</filename> directory, or open a port as root.
</para>
</listitem>
</itemizedlist>
</listitem>
</itemizedlist>
<para>
Of course, the last one is just a safety measures, and intended to save you from
enraging users if you do something wrong in some setuid daemon...  When you gain
more experience in packaging, you'll be able to package such software.
</para>
<para>
As a new maintainer, you are encouraged to get some experience in packaging
with easier packages and discouraged from creating complicated packages.  
</para>
<itemizedlist>
<listitem><para>Simple packages</para>
<itemizedlist>
<listitem><para>single binary package, arch = all (collection of data such as wallpaper graphics)</para></listitem>
<listitem><para>single binary package, arch = all (executables written in an interpreted language such as POSIX shell)</para></listitem>
</itemizedlist>
</listitem>
<listitem><para>Intermediate complexity packages</para>
<itemizedlist>
<listitem><para>single binary package, arch = any (ELF binary executables compiled from languages such as C and C++)</para></listitem>
<listitem><para>multiple binary packages, arch = any + all (packages for ELF binary executables + documentation)</para></listitem>
<listitem><para>upstream source in a format other than <filename>tar.gz</filename> or <filename>tar.bz2</filename></para></listitem>
<listitem><para>upstream source containing undistributable contents</para></listitem>
</itemizedlist>
</listitem>
<listitem><para>High complexity packages</para>
<itemizedlist>
<listitem><para>interpreter module package used by other packages</para></listitem>
<listitem><para>generic ELF library package used by other packages</para></listitem>
<listitem><para>multiple binary packages including an ELF library package</para></listitem>
<listitem><para>source package with multiple upstream sources</para></listitem>
<listitem><para>kernel module packages</para></listitem>
<listitem><para>kernel patch packages</para></listitem>
<listitem><para>any package with non-trivial maintainer scripts</para></listitem>
</itemizedlist>
</listitem>
</itemizedlist>
<para>
Packaging high complexity packages is not too hard, but it requires a bit more
knowledge. You should seek specific guidance for every complex feature. For
example, some languages have their own sub-policy documents:
</para>
<itemizedlist>
<listitem><para><ulink url="&policy-perl;">Perl policy</ulink></para></listitem>
<listitem><para><ulink url="&policy-python;">Python policy</ulink></para></listitem>
<listitem><para><ulink url="&policy-java;">Java policy</ulink></para></listitem>
</itemizedlist>
<para>
There is another old Latin saying: <emphasis>fabricando fit faber</emphasis>
(practice makes perfect).  It is <emphasis>highly</emphasis> recommended to
practice and experiment with all the steps of Debian packaging with simple packages
while reading this tutorial.  A trivial upstream tarball
<filename>hello-sh-1.0.tar.gz</filename> created as followings may offer
a good starting point.<footnote><para>Do not worry about the missing
<filename>Makefile</filename>.  You can install the <command>hello</command>
command by simply using <command>debhelper</command> as in
<xref linkend="install"/>, or by modifying the upstream source to add a new
<filename>Makefile</filename> with the <literal>install</literal> target as in
<xref linkend="modify"/>.</para></footnote>
</para>
<screen>
$ mkdir -p hello-sh/hello-sh-1.0; cd hello-sh/hello-sh-1.0
$ cat &gt; hello &lt;&lt;EOF
#!/bin/sh
# (C) 2011 Foo Bar, GPL2+
echo "Hello!"
EOF
$ chmod 755 hello
$ cd ..
$ tar -cvzf hello-sh-1.0.tar.gz hello-sh-1.0
</screen>
</section>
<section id="getit"><title>Get the program, and try it out</title>
<para>
So the first thing to do is to find and download the original source code.
Presumably you already have the source file that you picked up at the
author's homepage.  Sources for free Unix programs usually come in
<command>tar</command>+<command>gzip</command> format with the extension
<filename>.tar.gz</filename>,
<command>tar</command>+<command>bzip2</command> format with the extension
<filename>.tar.bz2</filename>, or
<command>tar</command>+<command>xz</command> format with the extension
<filename>.tar.xz</filename>.  These usually contain a directory called
<filename><replaceable>package</replaceable>-<replaceable>version</replaceable></filename>
with all the sources inside.
</para>
<para>
If the latest version of the source is available through a VCS such as Git,
Subversion, or CVS, you need to get it with <literal>git
clone</literal>, <literal>svn co</literal>, or <literal>cvs co</literal> and
repack it into <command>tar</command>+<command>gzip</command> format yourself
by using the <literal>--exclude-vcs</literal> option.
</para>
<para>
If your program's source comes as some other sort of archive (for instance, the
filename ends in <filename>.Z</filename> or
<filename>.zip</filename><footnote><para> You can identify the archive format
using the <command>file</command> command when the file extension is not
enough.  </para> </footnote>), you should also unpack it with the
appropriate tools and repack it.
</para>
<para>
If your program's source comes with some contents which do not comply with
DFSG, you should also unpack it to remove such contents and repack it with a
modified upstream version containing <literal>dfsg</literal>.
</para>
<para>
As an example, I'll use a program called <command>gentoo</command>, a GTK+
file manager.
<footnote><para> This program is already packaged. The
<ulink url="&gentoo-package;">current version</ulink> uses Autotools as its
build structure and is substantially different from the following examples,
which were based on version 0.9.12.</para>
</footnote>
</para>
<para>
Create a subdirectory under your home directory named
<filename>debian</filename> or <filename>deb</filename> or anything you find
appropriate (e.g.  just <filename>~/gentoo</filename> would do fine in this
case).  Place the downloaded archive in it, and extract it (with <literal>tar
xzf gentoo-0.9.12.tar.gz</literal>).  Make sure there are no warning
messages, even <emphasis>irrelevant</emphasis> ones, because other
people's unpacking tools may or may not ignore these anomalies, so they
may have problems unpacking them.  Your shell command line may look
something like this:
</para>
<screen>
$ mkdir ~/gentoo ; cd ~/gentoo
$ wget http://<replaceable>www.example.org</replaceable>/gentoo-0.9.12.tar.gz
$ tar xvzf gentoo-0.9.12.tar.gz
$ ls -F
gentoo-0.9.12/
gentoo-0.9.12.tar.gz
</screen>
<para>
Now you have another subdirectory, called <filename>gentoo-0.9.12</filename>.
Change to that directory and <emphasis>thoroughly</emphasis> read the provided
documentation.  Usually there are files named <filename>README*</filename>,
<filename>INSTALL*</filename>, <filename>*.lsm</filename> or
<filename>*.html</filename>.  You must find instructions on how to
compile and install the program (most probably they'll assume you want to
install to the <filename>/usr/local/bin</filename> directory; you won't be doing
that, but more on that later in <xref linkend="destdir"/>).
</para>
<para>
You should start packaging with a completely clean (pristine) source directory,
or simply with freshly unpacked sources.
</para>
</section>
<section id="simplemake"><title>Simple build systems</title>
<para>
Simple programs usually come with a <filename>Makefile</filename> and can
be compiled just by invoking <literal>make</literal>.<footnote><para>
Many modern programs come with a script <filename>configure</filename> which
when executed creates a <filename>Makefile</filename> customized for
your system.</para></footnote> Some of them support
<literal>make check</literal>, which runs included self-tests.  Installation
to the destination directories is usually done with <literal>make
install</literal>.
</para>
<para>
Now try to compile and run your program, to make sure it works properly and
doesn't break something else while it's installing or running.
</para>
<para>
Also, you can usually run <literal>make clean</literal> (or better
<literal>make distclean</literal>) to clean up the build directory.  Sometimes
there's even a <literal>make uninstall</literal> which can be used to remove
all the installed files.
</para>
</section>
<section id="portable"><title>Popular portable build systems</title>
<para>
A lot of free software programs are written in the <ulink url="&c-program;">C</ulink> and
<ulink url="&cxx;">C++</ulink> languages.  Many of these use Autotools or 
CMake to make them portable across different platforms.  These build tools need 
to be used to generate the <filename>Makefile</filename> and other
required source files first.  Then, such programs are built using the usual
<literal>make; make install</literal>.
</para>
<para>
<ulink url="&gnu-build-system;">Autotools</ulink> is the GNU build
system comprising <ulink url="&autoconf;">Autoconf</ulink>,
<ulink url="&automake;">Automake</ulink>,
<ulink url="&libtool;">Libtool</ulink>, and
<ulink url="&gettext;">gettext</ulink>.  You can recognize
such sources by the <filename>configure.ac</filename>,
<filename>Makefile.am</filename>, and <filename>Makefile.in</filename> files.
<footnote><para>Autotools is too big to deal in this small tutorial. This
section is meant to provide keywords and references only.  Please make sure to read the 
<ulink url="&autotools-tutorial;">Autotools Tutorial</ulink> and 
the local copy of <filename>&autotools-readme;</filename>, 
if you need to use it.</para></footnote>
</para>
<para>
The first step of the Autotools workflow is usually that upstream runs
<literal>autoreconf -i -f</literal> in the source directory and
distributes the generated files along with the source.
</para>
<screen>
configure.ac-----+-&gt; autoreconf -+-&gt; configure
Makefile.am -----+        |      +-&gt; Makefile.in
src/Makefile.am -+        |      +-&gt; src/Makefile.in
                          |      +-&gt; config.h.in
                      automake
                      aclocal
                      aclocal.m4
                      autoheader
</screen>
<para>
Editing <filename>configure.ac</filename> and <filename>Makefile.am</filename>
files requires some knowledge of <command>autoconf</command> and
<command>automake</command>.  See <literal>info autoconf</literal> and
<literal>info automake</literal>.
</para>
<para>
The second step of the Autotools workflow is usually that the user obtains this
distributed source and runs <literal>./configure &amp;&amp; make</literal> in
the source directory to compile the program into an executable command
<command><replaceable>binary</replaceable></command>.
</para>
<screen>
Makefile.in -----+                +-&gt; Makefile -----+-&gt; make -&gt; <replaceable>binary</replaceable>
src/Makefile.in -+-&gt; ./configure -+-&gt; src/Makefile -+
config.h.in -----+                +-&gt; config.h -----+
                 |
  config.status -+
  config.guess --+
</screen>
<para>
You can change many things in the <filename>Makefile</filename>; for
instance you can change the default location for file installation
using the option <literal>./configure --prefix=/usr</literal>.
</para>
<para>
Although it is not required, updating the <filename>configure</filename> and
other files with <literal>autoreconf -i -f</literal> may improve
the compatibility of the source.
<footnote><para>You can automate this by using 
<systemitem role="package">dh-autoreconf</systemitem> package.  
See <xref linkend="customrules"/>.</para></footnote>
</para>
<para>
<ulink url="&cmake;">CMake</ulink> is an alternative
build system.  You can recognize such sources by the
<filename>CMakeLists.txt</filename> file.
</para>
</section>
<section id="namever"><title>Package name and version</title>
<para>
If the upstream source comes as <filename>gentoo-0.9.12.tar.gz</filename>, you can
take <literal>gentoo</literal> as the (source) <emphasis role="strong">package name</emphasis>
and <literal>0.9.12</literal> as the <emphasis role="strong">upstream version</emphasis>.
These are used in the <filename>debian/changelog</filename> file described later in
<xref linkend="changelog"/>, too.
</para>
<para>
Although this simple approach works most of the times, you may need to adjust
<emphasis role="strong">package name</emphasis> and 
<emphasis role="strong">upstream version</emphasis> by renaming the upstream
source to follow Debian Policy and existing convention.
</para>
<para>
You must choose the <emphasis role="strong">package name</emphasis> 
to consist only of lower case letters (<literal>a-z</literal>), digits
(<literal>0-9</literal>), plus (<literal>+</literal>) and minus
(<literal>-</literal>) signs, and periods (<literal>.</literal>). It must be
at least two characters long, must start with an alphanumeric character, and
must not be the same as existing ones.
It is a good idea to keep its length within 30 characters.
<footnote><para>The default package name field length of <command>aptitude</command> is 30.  For more than 90% of packages, the package name is less than 24 characters.</para></footnote>
</para>
<!--
Osamu's archive stat (2011-04-23, sid, kfreebsd-amd64):
=== stat for package name string length ===
11 1947 36.9%   mode
14 1717 54.7%  50% median
23 611 91.0%   90%
32 89 99.0%    99%
41 12 99.9%    99.9%
52 1 100.0%
Previous 20 chars is becoming too short for 17% of packages
Default aptitude setting display up to 30 chars (98.3%).
-->
<para>
If upstream uses some generic term such as <literal>test-suite</literal> for
its name, it is a good idea to rename it to identify its contents explicitly and avoid namespace pollution.
<footnote><para>If you follow the 
<ulink url="&devref-newpackage;">Debian Developer's Reference 5.1. "New packages"</ulink>, 
the ITP process will usually catch this kind of issues.</para></footnote>
</para>
<para>
You should choose the <emphasis role="strong">upstream version</emphasis> 
to consist only of
alphanumerics (<literal>0-9A-Za-z</literal>), plus (<literal>+</literal>),
tildes (<literal>~</literal>), and periods (<literal>.</literal>). It must
start with a digit (<literal>0-9</literal>).  <footnote><para>This stricter
rule should help you avoid confusing file names.</para></footnote>
It is good idea to keep its length within 8 characters if possible.
<footnote><para>The default version field length of <command>aptitude</command> is 10.  The Debian revision with preceding hyphen usually consumes 2.  For more than 80% of packages, the upstream version is less than 8 characters and the Debian revision is less than 2 characters.  For more than 90% of packages, the upstream version is less than 10 characters and the Debian revision is less than 3 characters.</para></footnote>
</para>
<!--
Osamu's archive stat (2011-04-23, sid, kfreebsd-amd64):
=== stat for upstream version string length ===
5 9765 60.2%  50% median and mode
6 3765 73.3%
7 2789 82.9%
8 1158 86.9%
9 501 88.6%
10 773 91.3%  90%
18 55 99.1%   99%
27 11 99.9%    99.9
35 6 100.0%
=== stat for debian revision string length ===
1 22556 83.3%  50% median and mode
2 1106 87.2%
3 1312 91.7%   90%
4 2127 99.1%   99%
7 14 99.9%     99.9%

aptitude display 10 = 8char for up + 1char (for -) + 1char for deb
90chars as max for file name of binary debs (package+up+deb+arch+.deb)
-->
<para>
If upstream does not use a normal versioning scheme such as
<literal>2.30.32</literal> but uses some kind of date such as
<literal>11Apr29</literal>, a random codename string, or a VCS hash value as part
of the version, make sure to remove them from the
<emphasis role="strong">upstream version</emphasis>.  Such information can be
recorded in the <filename>debian/changelog</filename> file.  If you need to
invent a version string, use the <literal>YYYYMMDD</literal> format such as
<literal>20110429</literal> as upstream version.  This ensures that
<command>dpkg</command> interprets later versions correctly as upgrades.
If you need to ensure smooth transition to the normal version scheme such as
<literal>0.1</literal> in future, use the <literal>0~YYMMDD</literal> format
such as <literal>0~110429</literal> as upstream version, instead.
</para>
<para>
Version strings <footnote><para>Version strings may be
<emphasis role="strong">upstream version</emphasis> 
(<literal><replaceable>version</replaceable></literal>),
<emphasis role="strong">Debian revision</emphasis> 
(<literal><replaceable>revision</replaceable></literal>), or
<emphasis role="strong">version</emphasis> 
(<literal><replaceable>version</replaceable>-<replaceable>revision</replaceable></literal>).
See <xref linkend="newrevision"/> for how the 
<emphasis role="strong">Debian revision</emphasis> is incremented.
</para></footnote>
can be compared using <citerefentry>
<refentrytitle>dpkg</refentrytitle> <manvolnum>1</manvolnum> </citerefentry> as follows.
</para>
<screen>
$ dpkg --compare-versions <replaceable>ver1</replaceable> <replaceable>op</replaceable> <replaceable>ver2</replaceable>
</screen>
<para>
The version comparison rule can be summarized as:
</para>
<itemizedlist>
<listitem><para>Strings are compared from the head to the tail.</para></listitem>
<listitem><para>Letters are larger than digits.</para></listitem>
<listitem><para>Numbers are compared as integers.</para></listitem>
<listitem><para>Letters are compared in ASCII code order.</para></listitem>
<listitem><para>There are special rules for period
(<literal>.</literal>), plus (<literal>+</literal>), and tilde
(<literal>~</literal>) characters, as follows.</para>
<para>
<literal>0.0</literal> &lt; 
<literal>0.5</literal> &lt; 
<literal>0.10</literal> &lt; 
<literal>0.99</literal> &lt; 
<literal>1</literal> &lt;
<literal>1.0~rc1</literal> &lt;
<literal>1.0</literal> &lt; 
<literal>1.0+b1</literal> &lt; 
<literal>1.0+nmu1</literal> &lt;
<literal>1.1</literal> &lt; 
<literal>2.0</literal>
</para>
</listitem>
</itemizedlist>
<para>
One tricky case occurs when upstream releases
<filename>gentoo-0.9.12-ReleaseCandidate-99.tar.gz</filename> as the
pre-release of <filename>gentoo-0.9.12.tar.gz</filename>.  You need to make
sure that the upgrade works properly by renaming the upstream source to
<filename>gentoo-0.9.12~rc99.tar.gz</filename>.
</para>
</section>
<section id="dh-make"><title>Setting up <command>dh_make</command></title>
<para>
Set up the shell environment variables <literal>$DEBEMAIL</literal> and
<literal>$DEBFULLNAME</literal> so that various Debian maintenance
tools recognize your email address and name to use for packages. <footnote><para> The
following text assumes you are using Bash as your login shell.  If you use
some other login shell such as Z shell, use their corresponding
configuration files instead of <filename>~/.bashrc</filename>. </para> </footnote>
</para>
<screen>
$ cat &gt;&gt;~/.bashrc &lt;&lt;EOF
DEBEMAIL="your.email.address@example.org"
DEBFULLNAME="Firstname Lastname"
export DEBEMAIL DEBFULLNAME
EOF
$ . ~/.bashrc
</screen>
</section>
<section id="non-native-dh-make"><title>Initial non-native Debian package</title>
<para>
Normal Debian packages are non-native Debian packages made from upstream
programs.  If you wish to create a non-native Debian package of an upstream
source <filename>gentoo-0.9.12.tar.gz</filename>, you can create an initial
non-native Debian package for it by issuing the <command>dh_make</command>
command as follows.
</para>
<screen>
$ cd ~/gentoo
$ wget http://example.org/gentoo-0.9.12.tar.gz
$ tar -xvzf gentoo-0.9.12.tar.gz
$ cd gentoo-0.9.12
$ dh_make -f ../gentoo-0.9.12.tar.gz
</screen>
<para>
Of course, replace the filename with the name of your original source archive.
<footnote><para> If the upstream source provides the
<filename>debian</filename> directory and its contents, run the
<command>dh_make</command> command with the extra option
<literal>--addmissing</literal>.  The new source <literal>3.0 (quilt)</literal> format is
robust enough not to break even for these packages.  You may need to update the contents
provided by the upstream for your Debian package.  </para> </footnote> See
<citerefentry> <refentrytitle>dh_make</refentrytitle> <manvolnum>8</manvolnum>
</citerefentry> for details.
</para>
<para>
You should see some output asking you what sort of package you want
to create.  Gentoo is a single binary package - it creates only one binary package, i.e,
one <filename>.deb</filename> file - so we will select the first option
(with the <literal>s</literal> key), check the information on the screen, and
confirm by pressing <literal><replaceable>ENTER</replaceable></literal>.
<footnote><para> There are several choices here: <literal>s</literal> for 
Single binary package, <literal>i</literal> for arch-Independent package, <literal>m</literal> for
Multiple binary packages, <literal>l</literal> for Library package, <literal>k</literal> for
Kernel module package, <literal>n</literal> for kernel patch package, and <literal>b</literal>
for <systemitem role="package">cdbs</systemitem> package.  This document focuses on the
use of the <command>dh</command> command (from the package
<systemitem role="package">debhelper</systemitem>) to create a single binary package,
but also touches on how to use it for arch-independent or
multiple binary packages.  The package
<systemitem role="package">cdbs</systemitem> offers an alternative packaging script
infrastructure to the <command>dh</command> command and is outside the scope of
this document.  </para> </footnote>
</para>
<para>
This execution of <command>dh_make</command> creates a copy of the upstream
tarball as <filename>gentoo_0.9.12.orig.tar.gz</filename> in the
parent directory to accommodate the creation of the non-native Debian source
package with the name <filename>debian.tar.gz</filename> later.
</para>
<screen>
$ cd ~/gentoo ; ls -F
gentoo-0.9.12/
gentoo-0.9.12.tar.gz
gentoo_0.9.12.orig.tar.gz
</screen>
<para>
Please note two key features of this filename
<filename>gentoo_0.9.12.orig.tar.gz</filename>:
</para>
<itemizedlist>
<listitem>
<para>
Package name and version are separated by the character <literal>_</literal>
(underscore).
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
The string <filename>.orig</filename> is inserted before the
<filename>.tar.gz</filename>.
</para>
</listitem>
</itemizedlist>
<para>
You should also notice that many template files are created in the source under
the <filename>debian</filename> directory.  These will be explained in
<xref linkend="dreq"/> and <xref linkend="dother"/>.  You should also understand
that packaging cannot be a fully automated process.  You will need to modify the upstream
source for Debian (see <xref linkend="modify"/>).  After this, you need to
use the proper methods for building Debian packages (<xref linkend="build"/>),
testing them (<xref linkend="checkit"/>), and uploading them (<xref linkend="upload"/>).
All the steps will be explained.
</para>
<para>
If you accidentally erased some template files while working on them, you can
recover them by running <command>dh_make</command> with the
<literal>--addmissing</literal> option again in a Debian package source tree.
</para>
<para>
Updating an existing package may get complicated since it may be using older
techniques.  While learning the basics, please stick to creating a fresh
package; further explanations are given in <xref linkend="update"/>.
</para>
<para>
Please note that the source file does not need to contain any build system
discussed in <xref linkend="simplemake"/> and <xref linkend="portable"/>.  It
could be just a collection of graphical data etc.  Installation of files may be
carried out using only <systemitem role="package">debhelper</systemitem> configuration
files such as <filename>debian/install</filename> (see
<xref linkend="install"/>).
</para>
</section>
<section id="native-dh-make"><title>Initial native Debian package</title>
<para>
If a package contains source files you are only maintaining for Debian,
possibly only for local use, it may be simpler to create it as a Debian
native package. If you have source
files in <filename>~/mypackage-1.0</filename>, you can create an initial native
Debian package for it by issuing the <command>dh_make</command> command as
follows.
</para>
<screen>
$ cd ~/mypackage-1.0
$ dh_make --native
</screen>
<para>
Then the <filename>debian</filename> directory and its contents are created
just like <xref linkend="non-native-dh-make"/>.  This does not create a tarball
since this is a native Debian package.  But that is the only difference.
The rest of the packaging activities are practically the same.
</para>
</section>
</chapter>
<chapter id="modify"><title>Modifying the source</title>
<para>
Please note that there isn't space here to go into <emphasis>all</emphasis> the
details of fixing upstream sources, but here are some basic steps and problems
people often run across.
</para>
<section id="quiltrc"><title>Setting up <command>quilt</command></title>
<para>
The program <command>quilt</command> offers a basic method for recording
modifications to the upstream source for Debian packaging.  It's
useful to have a slightly customized default, so let's create an alias
<command>dquilt</command> for Debian packaging by adding the following
line to <filename>~/.bashrc</filename>.
</para>
<screen>
alias dquilt="quilt --quiltrc=${HOME}/.quiltrc-dpkg"
</screen>
<para>
Then let's create <filename>~/.quiltrc-dpkg</filename> as follows.
</para>
<screen>
d=. ; while [ ! -d $d/debian -a `readlink -e $d` != / ]; do d=$d/..; done
if [ -d $d/debian ] &amp;&amp; [ -z $QUILT_PATCHES ]; then
    # if in Debian packaging tree with unset $QUILT_PATCHES
    QUILT_PATCHES="debian/patches"
    QUILT_PATCH_OPTS="--reject-format=unified"
    QUILT_DIFF_ARGS="-p ab --no-timestamps --no-index --color=auto"
    QUILT_REFRESH_ARGS="-p ab --no-timestamps --no-index"
    QUILT_COLORS="diff_hdr=1;32:diff_add=1;34:diff_rem=1;31:diff_hunk=1;33:diff_ctx=35:diff_cctx=33"
    if ! [ -d $d/debian/patches ]; then mkdir $d/debian/patches; fi
fi
</screen>
<para>
See <citerefentry> <refentrytitle>quilt</refentrytitle>
<manvolnum>1</manvolnum> </citerefentry> and
<filename>&quilt-pdf;</filename> on how to use
<command>quilt</command>.
</para>
</section>
<section id="fixupstream"><title>Fixing upstream bugs</title>
<para>
Let's assume you find an error in the upstream <filename>Makefile</filename>
as follows where <literal>install: gentoo</literal> should have been
<literal>install: gentoo-target</literal>.
</para>
<screen>
install: gentoo
        install ./gentoo $(BIN)
        install icons/* $(ICONS)
        install gentoorc-example $(HOME)/.gentoorc
</screen>
<para>
Let's fix this and record it with the <command>dquilt</command> command as
<filename>fix-gentoo-target.patch</filename>.  <footnote><para> The
<filename>debian/patches</filename> directory should exist now if you ran
<command>dh_make</command> as described before.  This example operation creates
it just in case you are updating an existing package.  </para> </footnote>
</para>
<screen>
$ mkdir debian/patches
$ dquilt new fix-gentoo-target.patch
$ dquilt add Makefile
</screen>
<para>
You change the <filename>Makefile</filename> file as follows.
</para>
<screen>
install: gentoo-target
        install ./gentoo $(BIN)
        install icons/* $(ICONS)
        install gentoorc-example $(HOME)/.gentoorc
</screen>
<para>
Ask <command>dquilt</command> to generate the patch to create
<filename>debian/patches/fix-gentoo-target.patch</filename> and add its
description following <ulink url="&dep3;">DEP-3: Patch Tagging Guidelines</ulink>.
</para>
<screen>
$ dquilt refresh
$ dquilt header -e
... describe patch
</screen>
</section>
<section id="destdir"><title>Installation of files to their destination</title>
<para>
Most third-party software installs itself in the <filename>/usr/local</filename>
directory hierarchy.  On Debian this is reserved for private use
by the system administrator, so packages must not use directories such
as <filename>/usr/local/bin</filename> but should instead use system
directories such as <filename>/usr/bin</filename>, obeying the
<ulink url="&fhs;">Filesystem Hierarchy Standard</ulink> (FHS).
</para>
<para>
Normally, <citerefentry> <refentrytitle>make</refentrytitle>
<manvolnum>1</manvolnum> </citerefentry> is used to automate building the
program, and executing <literal>make install</literal> installs programs
directly to the desired destination (following the
<literal>install</literal> target in the
<filename>Makefile</filename>).  In order for Debian to provide
pre-built installable packages, it modifies the build system to install
programs into a file tree image created under a temporary directory
instead of the actual destination.
</para>
<para>
These two differences between normal program installation on one hand and the
Debian packaging system on the other can be transparently addressed by the
<systemitem role="package">debhelper</systemitem> package through the
<command>dh_auto_configure</command> and <command>dh_auto_install</command>
commands if the following conditions are met.
</para>
<itemizedlist>
<listitem>
<para>
The <filename>Makefile</filename> must follow GNU conventions and
support the <literal>$(DESTDIR)</literal> variable.
<footnote><para> See <ulink url="&gnu-destdir;">GNU Coding Standards: 7.2.4 DESTDIR: Support for Staged Installs</ulink>.</para></footnote>
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
The source must follow the Filesystem Hierarchy Standard (FHS).
</para>
</listitem>
</itemizedlist>
<para>
Programs that use GNU <command>autoconf</command> follow the GNU conventions
automatically, so they can be trivial to package.  On the basis of
this and other heuristics, it is estimated that the
<systemitem role="package">debhelper</systemitem> package will work for
about 90% of packages without making any intrusive changes to their
build system.  So packaging is not as complicated as it may seem.
</para>
<para>
If you need to make changes in the <filename>Makefile</filename>, you
should be careful to support the <literal>$(DESTDIR)</literal>
variable.  Although it is unset by default, the <literal>$(DESTDIR)</literal> 
variable is prepended to each file path used for the program
installation.  The packaging script will set
<literal>$(DESTDIR)</literal> to the temporary directory. 
</para>
<para>
For a source package generating a single binary package, the temporary directory used
by the <command>dh_auto_install</command> command will be set to
<filename>debian/<replaceable>package</replaceable></filename>.
<footnote><para> For a source package generating multiple binary packages, the
<command>dh_auto_install</command> command uses <filename>debian/tmp</filename>
as the temporary directory while the <command>dh_install</command> command with
the help of
<filename>debian/<replaceable>package-1</replaceable>.install</filename> and
<filename>debian/<replaceable>package-2</replaceable>.install</filename> files
will split the contents of <filename>debian/tmp</filename> into
<filename>debian/<replaceable>package-1</replaceable></filename> and
<filename>debian/<replaceable>package-2</replaceable></filename> temporary
directories, to create 
<filename><replaceable>package-1</replaceable>_*.deb</filename> and
<filename><replaceable>package-2</replaceable>_*.deb</filename> binary
packages.
</para> </footnote> Everything that is contained in the temporary directory
will be installed on users' systems when they install your package; the only
difference is that <command>dpkg</command> will be installing the
files to paths relative to the root directory rather than your working
directory.
</para>
<para>
Bear in mind that even though your program installs in
<filename>debian/<replaceable>package</replaceable></filename>, it still needs
to behave correctly when installed from the <filename>.deb</filename>
package under the root directory.  So you must not allow the build
system to hardcode strings like
<literal>/home/me/deb/<replaceable>package</replaceable>-<replaceable>version</replaceable>/usr/share/<replaceable>package</replaceable></literal>
into files in the package.
</para>
<para>
Here's the relevant part of <systemitem role="package">gentoo</systemitem>'s
<filename>Makefile</filename><footnote><para> This is just an example to
show what a <filename>Makefile</filename> should look like.  If the
<filename>Makefile</filename> is created by the
<command>./configure</command> command, the correct way to fix this kind of
<filename>Makefile</filename> is to execute <command>./configure</command>
from the <command>dh_auto_configure</command> command with default
options including <literal>--prefix=/usr</literal>.  </para> </footnote>:
</para>
<screen>
# Where to put executable commands on 'make install'?
BIN     = /usr/local/bin
# Where to put icons on 'make install'?
ICONS   = /usr/local/share/gentoo
</screen>
<para>
We see that the files are set to install under <filename>/usr/local</filename>.
As explained above, that directory hierarchy is reserved for local use on
Debian, so change those paths to:
</para>
<screen>
# Where to put executable commands on 'make install'?
BIN     = $(DESTDIR)/usr/bin
# Where to put icons on 'make install'?
ICONS   = $(DESTDIR)/usr/share/gentoo
</screen>
<para>
The exact locations that should be used for binaries, icons,
documentation, etc. are specified in the Filesystem Hierarchy Standard
(FHS).  You should browse through it and read the sections relevant to
your package.
</para>
<para>
So, we should install executable commands in <filename>/usr/bin</filename> instead of
<filename>/usr/local/bin</filename>, the manual page in
<filename>/usr/share/man/man1</filename> instead of
<filename>/usr/local/man/man1</filename>, and so on.  Notice how there's no manual
page mentioned in <systemitem role="package">gentoo</systemitem>'s
<filename>Makefile</filename>, but since Debian Policy requires that every
program has one, we'll make one later and install it in
<filename>/usr/share/man/man1</filename>.
</para>
<para>
Some programs don't use <filename>Makefile</filename> variables to define paths
such as these.  This means you might have to edit some real C sources in order
to fix them to use the right locations.  But where to search, and exactly what
for?  You can find this out by issuing:
</para>
<screen>
$ grep -nr --include='*.[c|h]' -e 'usr/local/lib' .
</screen>
<para>
<command>grep</command> will run recursively through the source tree and tell
you the filename and the line number for all matches.
</para>
<para>
Edit those files and in those lines replace <literal>usr/local/lib</literal>
with <literal>usr/lib</literal>.  This can be done automatically as follows:
</para>
<screen>
$ sed -i -e 's#usr/local/lib#usr/lib#g' \
        $(find . -type f -name '*.[c|h]')
</screen>
<para>
If you want to confirm each substitution instead, this can be done interactively as follows:
</para>
<screen>
$ vim '+argdo %s#usr/local/lib#usr/lib#gce|update' +q \
        $(find . -type f -name '*.[c|h]')
</screen>

<para>
Next you should find the <literal>install</literal> target (searching
for the line that starts with <literal>install:</literal> will usually
work) and rename all references to directories other than ones defined
at the top of the <filename>Makefile</filename>.
</para>
<para>
Originally, <systemitem role="package">gentoo</systemitem>'s
<literal>install</literal> target said:
</para>
<screen>
install: gentoo-target
        install ./gentoo $(BIN)
        install icons/* $(ICONS)
        install gentoorc-example $(HOME)/.gentoorc
</screen>
<para>
Let's fix this upstream bug and record it with the <command>dquilt</command> command as
<filename>debian/patches/install.patch</filename>.
</para>
<screen>
$ dquilt new install.patch
$ dquilt add Makefile
</screen>
<para>
In your editor, change this for the Debian package as follows:
</para>
<screen>
install: gentoo-target
        install -d $(BIN) $(ICONS) $(DESTDIR)/etc
        install ./gentoo $(BIN)
        install -m644 icons/* $(ICONS)
        install -m644 gentoorc-example $(DESTDIR)/etc/gentoorc
</screen>
<para>
You'll have noticed that there's now an <literal>install -d</literal> command
before the other commands in the rule.  The original
<filename>Makefile</filename> didn't have it because usually
<literal>/usr/local/bin</literal> and other directories already exist on the
system where you are running <literal>make install</literal>.  However, since we will
be installing into a newly created private directory tree, we will have to
create each and every one of those directories.
</para>
<para>
We can also add in other things at the end of the rule, like the installation
of additional documentation that the upstream authors sometimes omit:
</para>
<screen>
        install -d $(DESTDIR)/usr/share/doc/gentoo/html
        cp -a docs/* $(DESTDIR)/usr/share/doc/gentoo/html
</screen>
<para>
Check carefully, and if everything is okay, ask <command>dquilt</command> to
generate the patch to create <filename>debian/patches/install.patch</filename>
and add its description.
</para>
<screen>
$ dquilt refresh
$ dquilt header -e
... describe patch
</screen>
<para>
Now you have a series of patches.
</para>
<orderedlist numeration="arabic">
<listitem>
<para>
Upstream bug fix: <filename>debian/patches/fix-gentoo-target.patch</filename>
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
Debian specific packaging modification:
<filename>debian/patches/install.patch</filename>
</para>
</listitem>
</orderedlist>
<para>
Whenever you make changes that are not specific to the Debian package
such as <filename>debian/patches/fix-gentoo-target.patch</filename>, be sure to
send them to the upstream maintainer so they can be included in the next
version of the program and be useful to everyone else.  Also remember
to avoid making your fixes specific to Debian or Linux - or even Unix!
Make them portable.  This will make your fixes much easier to apply.
</para>
<para>
Note that you don't have to send the <filename>debian/*</filename> files
upstream.
</para>
</section>
<section id="difflibs"><title>Differing libraries</title>
<para>
There is one other common problem: libraries are often different from platform
to platform.  For example, a <filename>Makefile</filename> can contain a
reference to a library which doesn't exist on the Debian system.  In that case, we
need to change it to a library which does exist in Debian, and serves the same
purpose.
</para>
<para>
Let's assume a line in your program's <filename>Makefile</filename> (or
<filename>Makefile.in</filename>) as the following.
</para>
<screen>
LIBS = -lfoo -lbar
</screen>
<para>
If your program doesn't compile since the <literal>foo</literal> library
doesn't exist and its equivalent is provided by the <literal>foo2</literal>
library on the Debian system, you can fix this build problem as
<filename>debian/patches/foo2.patch</filename> by changing
<literal>foo</literal> into <literal>foo2</literal>.<footnote><para>If there
are API changes from the <literal>foo</literal> library to the
<literal>foo2</literal> library, required changes to the source code need to be
made to match the new API.</para> </footnote>
</para>
<screen>
$ dquilt new foo2.patch
$ dquilt add Makefile
$ sed -i -e 's/-lfoo/-lfoo2/g' Makefile
$ dquilt refresh
$ dquilt header -e
... describe patch
</screen>
</section>
</chapter>
<chapter id="dreq"><title>Required files under the <filename>debian</filename> directory</title>
<para>
There is a new subdirectory under the program's source directory, called
<filename>debian</filename>.  There are a number of files in this directory
that we should edit in order to customize the behavior of the package.  The
most important of them are <filename>control</filename>,
<filename>changelog</filename>, <filename>copyright</filename>, and
<filename>rules</filename>, which are required for all packages.
<footnote><para>
In this chapter, files in the <filename>debian</filename> directory are
referred to without the leading <filename>debian/</filename> for simplicity whenever
the meaning is obvious.
</para></footnote>
</para>
<section id="control"><title><filename>control</filename></title>
<para>
This file contains various values which <command>dpkg</command>,
<command>dselect</command>, <command>apt-get</command>,
<command>apt-cache</command>, <command>aptitude</command>, and other package
management tools will use to manage the package.  It is defined by the
<ulink url="&policy-control;">Debian Policy Manual, 5 "Control files and their fields"</ulink>.
</para>
<para>
Here is the <filename>control</filename> file <command>dh_make</command>
created for us:
</para>
<screen>
 1 Source: gentoo
 2 Section: unknown
 3 Priority: extra
 4 Maintainer: Josip Rodin &lt;joy-mg@debian.org&gt;
 5 Build-Depends: debhelper (&gt;= 7.0.50~)
 6 Standards-Version: 3.8.4
 7 Homepage: &lt;insert the upstream URL, if relevant&gt;
 8
 9 Package: gentoo
10 Architecture: any
11 Depends: ${shlibs:Depends}, ${misc:Depends}
12 Description: &lt;insert up to 60 chars description&gt;
13  &lt;insert long description, indented with spaces&gt;
</screen>
<para>
(I've added the line numbers.)
</para>
<para>
Lines 1-7 are the control information for the source package.
Lines 9-13 are the control information for the binary package.
</para>
<para>
Line 1 is the name of the source package.
</para>
<para>
Line 2 is the section of the distribution the source package goes into.
</para>
<para>
As you may have noticed, the Debian archive is divided into multiple areas:
<literal>main</literal> (the free software), <literal>non-free</literal> (the
not really free software) and <literal>contrib</literal> (free software that
depends on non-free software).  Each of these is divided into sections that
classify packages into rough categories.  So we have <literal>admin</literal>
for administrator-only programs,
<literal>devel</literal> for programmer tools, <literal>doc</literal> for
documentation, <literal>libs</literal> for libraries, <literal>mail</literal>
for email readers and daemons, <literal>net</literal> for network apps and
daemons, <literal>x11</literal> for X11 programs that don't fit anywhere else,
and many more.
<footnote> <para>See 
<ulink url="&policy-subsections;">Debian Policy Manual, 2.4 "Sections"</ulink> and 
<ulink url="&sections-unstable;">List of sections in <literal>sid</literal></ulink>.</para>
</footnote>
</para>
<para>
Let's change it then to x11.  (A <literal>main/</literal> prefix is implied so
we can omit it.)
</para>
<para>
Line 3 describes how important it is that the user installs this package.
<footnote> <para>See 
<ulink url="&policy-priorities;">Debian Policy Manual, 2.5 "Priorities"</ulink>.
</para>
</footnote>
</para>
<itemizedlist>
<listitem>
<para>
The <literal>optional</literal> priority will usually work for new packages
that do not conflict with others claiming <literal>required</literal>,
<literal>important</literal>, or <literal>standard</literal> priority.
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
The <literal>extra</literal> priority will usually work for new packages that
conflict with others with non-<literal>extra</literal> priorities.
</para>
</listitem>
</itemizedlist>
<para>
Section and priority are used by front-ends like <command>aptitude</command>
when they sort packages and select defaults.  Once you upload the package to
Debian, the value of these two fields can be overridden by the archive
maintainers, in which case you will be notified by email.
</para>
<para>
As this is a normal priority package and doesn't conflict with anything else,
we will change the priority to <literal>optional</literal>.
</para>
<para>
Line 4 is the name and email address of the maintainer.  Make sure that this
field includes a valid <literal>To</literal> header for email, because after
you upload it, the bug tracking system will use it to deliver bug emails to
you.  Avoid using commas, ampersands, or parentheses.
</para>
<para>
Line 5 includes the list of packages required to build your package as
the <literal>Build-Depends</literal> field.  You can also have the
<literal>Build-Depends-Indep</literal> field as an additional line, here.
<footnote><para>See 
<ulink url="&policy-relationships;#s-sourcebinarydeps">Debian Policy Manual, 7.7 "Relationships between source and binary packages - Build-Depends, Build-Depends-Indep, Build-Conflicts, Build-Conflicts-Indep"</ulink>.</para></footnote>
Some packages like 
<systemitem role="package">gcc</systemitem> and 
<systemitem role="package">make</systemitem> which are required by the 
<systemitem role="package">build-essential</systemitem> package are implied.  If you need
to have other tools to build your package, you should add them to these fields.
Multiple entries are separated with commas; read on for the explanation of
binary package dependencies to find out more about the syntax of these lines.
</para>
<itemizedlist>
<listitem>
<para>
For all packages packaged with the <command>dh</command> command in the
<filename>debian/rules</filename> file, you must have <literal>debhelper
(&gt;=7.0.50~)</literal> in the <literal>Build-Depends</literal> field to
satisfy the Debian Policy requirement for the <literal>clean</literal> target.
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
Source packages which have binary packages with <literal>Architecture:
any</literal> are rebuilt by the autobuilder.  Since this autobuilder
procedure installs only the packages listed in the
<literal>Build-Depends</literal> field before running
<literal>debian/rules build</literal> (see <xref
linkend="autobuilder"/>), the <literal>Build-Depends</literal> field
needs to  list practically all the required packages and
<literal>Build-Depends-Indep</literal> is rarely used.
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
For source packages with binary packages all of which are <literal>Architecture:
all</literal>, the <literal>Build-Depends-Indep</literal> field may list all
the required packages unless they are already listed in the
<literal>Build-Depends</literal> field to satisfy the Debian Policy requirement
for the <literal>clean</literal> target.
</para>
</listitem>
</itemizedlist>
<para>
If you are not sure which one should be used, use the
<literal>Build-Depends</literal> field to be on the safe side.
<footnote><para> This somewhat strange situation is a feature well documented
in the <ulink url="&policy-build-depends-indep;">Debian Policy
Manual, Footnotes 55</ulink>.  This is not due to the use of the
<command>dh</command> command in the <filename>debian/rules</filename> file but
due to how the <command>dpkg-buildpackage</command> works.  The same situation
applies to the <ulink url="https://bugs.launchpad.net/launchpad-buildd/+bug/238141">auto build system
for Ubuntu</ulink>.  </para> </footnote>
</para>
<para>
To find out what packages your package needs to be built run the command:
</para>
<screen>
$ dpkg-depcheck -d ./configure
</screen>
<para>
To manually find exact build dependencies for
<command><replaceable>/usr/bin/foo</replaceable></command>, execute
</para>
<screen>
$ objdump -p <replaceable>/usr/bin/foo</replaceable> | grep NEEDED
</screen>
<para>
and for each library listed, e.g., <command>libfoo.so.6</command>, execute
</para>
<screen>
$ dpkg -S libfoo.so.6
</screen>
<para>
Then just take the <literal>-dev</literal> version of every package as a
<literal>Build-Depends</literal> entry.  If you use <command>ldd</command> for
this purpose, it will report indirect lib dependencies as well, resulting in
the problem of excessive build dependencies.
</para>
<para>
<systemitem role="package">gentoo</systemitem> also happens to require
<systemitem role="package">xlibs-dev</systemitem>, <systemitem role="package">libgtk1.2-dev</systemitem> and <systemitem role="package">libglib1.2-dev</systemitem> to build, so we'll add them here
next to <systemitem role="package">debhelper</systemitem>.
</para>
<para>
Line 6 is the version of the <ulink url="&debian-policy;">Debian Policy
Manual</ulink> standards this package follows, the one you read while making
your package.
</para>
<para>
On line 7 you can put the URL of the software's upstream homepage.
</para>
<para>
Line 9 is the name of the binary package.  This is usually the same as the name
of the source package, but it doesn't necessarily have to be that way.
</para>
<para>
Line 10 describes the architectures the binary package can be compiled for.
This value is usually one of the following depending
on the type of the binary package.
<footnote><para>See 
<ulink url="&policy-architecture;">Debian Policy Manual, 5.6.8 "Architecture"</ulink>
for exact details.
</para></footnote>
</para>
<itemizedlist>
<listitem><para><literal>Architecture: any</literal></para>
<itemizedlist>
<listitem><para>The generated binary package is an architecture dependent one
usually in a compiled language.</para></listitem>
</itemizedlist>
</listitem>
<listitem><para><literal>Architecture: all</literal></para>
<itemizedlist>
<listitem><para>The generated binary package is an architecture independent
one usually consisting of text, images, or scripts in an interpreted
language.</para></listitem>
</itemizedlist>
</listitem>
</itemizedlist>
<para>
We leave line 10 as is since this is written in C.
<citerefentry><refentrytitle>dpkg-gencontrol</refentrytitle><manvolnum>1</manvolnum></citerefentry>
will fill in the appropriate architecture value for any machine this source
package gets compiled on.
</para>
<para>
If your package is architecture independent (for example, a shell or Perl
script, or a document), change this to <literal>all</literal>, and read later
in <xref linkend="rules"/> about using the <literal>binary-indep</literal> rule
instead of <literal>binary-arch</literal> for building the package.
</para>
<para>
Line 11 shows one of the most powerful features of the Debian packaging system.
Packages can relate to each other in various ways.  Apart from
<literal>Depends</literal>, other relationship fields are
<literal>Recommends</literal>, <literal>Suggests</literal>,
<literal>Pre-Depends</literal>, <literal>Breaks</literal>,
<literal>Conflicts</literal>, <literal>Provides</literal>, and
<literal>Replaces</literal>.
</para>
<para>
The package management tools usually behave the same way when dealing with
these relations; if not, it will be explained.  (See <citerefentry>
<refentrytitle>dpkg</refentrytitle> <manvolnum>8</manvolnum> </citerefentry>,
<citerefentry> <refentrytitle>dselect</refentrytitle> <manvolnum>8</manvolnum>
</citerefentry>, <citerefentry> <refentrytitle>apt</refentrytitle>
<manvolnum>8</manvolnum> </citerefentry>, <citerefentry>
<refentrytitle>aptitude</refentrytitle> <manvolnum>1</manvolnum>
</citerefentry>, etc.)
</para>
<para>
Here is a simplified description of package relationships.
<footnote><para>See 
<ulink url="&policy-relationships;">Debian Policy Manual, 7 "Declaring relationships between packages"</ulink>.
</para></footnote>
</para>
<itemizedlist>
<listitem>
<para>
<literal>Depends</literal>
</para>
<para>
The package will not be installed unless the packages it depends on are
installed.  Use this if your program absolutely will not run (or will cause
severe breakage) unless a particular package is present.
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
<literal>Recommends</literal>
</para>
<para>
Use this for packages that are not strictly necessary but are typically used
with your program.  When a user installs your program, all front-ends will
probably prompt them to install the recommended packages.
<command>aptitude</command> and <command>apt-get</command> install recommended
packages along with your package by default (but the user can disable this
behavior).  <command>dpkg</command> will ignore this field.
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
<literal>Suggests</literal>
</para>
<para>
Use this for packages which will work nicely with your program but are not at
all necessary.  When a user installs your program, they will probably not be
prompted to install suggested packages.  <command>aptitude</command> can
be configured to install suggested packages along with your package but this is
not its default.  <command>dpkg</command> and <command>apt-get</command> will
ignore this field.
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
<literal>Pre-Depends</literal>
</para>
<para>
This is stronger than <literal>Depends</literal>.  The package will not be
installed unless the packages it pre-depends on are installed and
<emphasis>correctly configured</emphasis>.  Use this <emphasis>very</emphasis>
sparingly and only after discussing it on the <ulink url="&debian-devel-ldo;">debian-devel@lists.debian.org</ulink>
mailing list.  Read: don't use it at all.  :-)
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
<literal>Conflicts</literal>
</para>
<para>
The package will not be installed until all the packages it conflicts with have
been removed.  Use this if your program absolutely will not run or will cause
severe problems if a particular package is present.
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
<literal>Breaks</literal>
</para>
<para>
When installed the package will break all the listed packages.
Normally a <literal>Breaks</literal> entry specifies that it applies to versions earlier than a certain value.
The resolution is generally to use higher-level package management tools to upgrade the listed packages.
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
<literal>Provides</literal>
</para>
<para>
For some types of packages where there are multiple alternatives virtual names
have been defined.  You can get the full list in the
<ulink url="&virtual-package;">virtual-package-names-list.txt.gz</ulink>
file.  Use this if your program provides a function of an existing virtual
package.
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
<literal>Replaces</literal>
</para>
<para>
Use this when your program replaces files from another package, or completely
replaces another package (used in conjunction with
<literal>Conflicts</literal>).  Files from the named packages will be
overwritten with the files from your package.
</para>
</listitem>
</itemizedlist>
<para>
All these fields have uniform syntax.  They are a list of package names
separated by commas.  These package names may also be lists of alternative
package names, separated by vertical bar symbols <literal>|</literal> (pipe
symbols).
</para>
<para>
The fields may restrict their applicability to particular versions of each
named package.  The restriction of each individual package is listed in
parentheses after its name, and should contain a relation from the list below
followed by a version number value.  
The relations allowed are: <literal>&lt;&lt;</literal>,
<literal>&lt;=</literal>, <literal>=</literal>, <literal>&gt;=</literal>, and
<literal>&gt;&gt;</literal> for strictly lower, lower or equal, exactly equal,
greater or equal, and strictly greater, respectively.  For example,
</para>
<screen>
Depends: foo (&gt;= 1.2), libbar1 (= 1.3.4)
Conflicts: baz
Recommends: libbaz4 (&gt;&gt; 4.0.7)
Suggests: quux
Replaces: quux (&lt;&lt; 5), quux-foo (&lt;= 7.6)
</screen>
<para>
The last feature you need to know about is
<literal>${shlibs:Depends}</literal>, <literal>${perl:Depends}</literal>,
<literal>${misc:Depends}</literal>, etc.
</para>
<para>
<citerefentry> <refentrytitle>dh_shlibdeps</refentrytitle>
<manvolnum>1</manvolnum> </citerefentry> calculates shared library dependencies
for binary packages.  It generates a list of <ulink url="&elf;">ELF</ulink> executables and shared
libraries it has found for each binary package.  This list is used for
substituting <literal>${shlibs:Depends}</literal>.
</para>
<para>
<citerefentry> <refentrytitle>dh_perl</refentrytitle> <manvolnum>1</manvolnum>
</citerefentry> calculates Perl dependencies.  It generates a list of a
dependencies on <literal>perl</literal> or <literal>perlapi</literal> for each binary package.  This list is used for
substituting <literal>${perl:Depends}</literal>.
</para>
<para>
Some <systemitem role="package">debhelper</systemitem> commands may cause the
generated package to depend on some additional packages.  All such commands
generate a list of required packages for each binary package.
This list is used for substituting <literal>${misc:Depends}</literal>.
</para>
<para>
<citerefentry> <refentrytitle>dh_gencontrol</refentrytitle>
<manvolnum>1</manvolnum> </citerefentry> generates
<filename>DEBIAN/control</filename> for each binary package while
substituting <literal>${shlibs:Depends}</literal>,
<literal>${perl:Depends}</literal>, <literal>${misc:Depends}</literal>, etc.
</para>
<para>
Having said all that, we can leave the <literal>Depends</literal> field exactly
as it is now, and insert another line after it saying <literal>Suggests:
file</literal>, because <systemitem role="package">gentoo</systemitem> can use
some features provided by the <systemitem role="package">file</systemitem>
package.
</para>
<para> Line 9 is the Homepage URL.  Let's assume this to be at 
<ulink url="&gentoo;"/>.
</para>
<para>
Line 12 is the short description.  Terminals are conventionally 80 columns wide so
this shouldn't be longer than about 60 characters.  I'll change it to
<literal>fully GUI-configurable, two-pane X file manager</literal>.
</para>
<para>
Line 13 is where the long description goes.  This should be a paragraph which
gives more details about the package.  Column 1 of each line should be empty.
There must be no blank lines, but you can put a single <literal>.</literal>
(dot) in a column to simulate that.  Also, there must be no more than one blank
line after the long description. <footnote><para>These descriptions are in
English.  Translations of these descriptions are provided by 
<ulink url="&ddtp;">The Debian Description Translation Project - DDTP</ulink>.</para></footnote>
</para>
<para>
We can insert <literal>Vcs-*</literal> fields to document the Version Control
System (VCS) location between lines 6 and 7.
<footnote><para>See 
<ulink url="&devref-bpp-vcs;">Debian Developer's Reference, 6.2.5. "Version Control System location"</ulink>.
</para></footnote>
Let's assume that the <systemitem role="package">gentoo</systemitem>
package has its VCS located in the Debian Alioth Git Service at
<literal>git://git.debian.org/git/collab-maint/gentoo.git</literal>.
</para>
<para>
Finally, here is the updated <filename>control</filename> file:
</para>
<screen>
 1 Source: gentoo
 2 Section: x11
 3 Priority: optional
 4 Maintainer: Josip Rodin &lt;joy-mg@debian.org&gt;
 5 Build-Depends: debhelper (&gt;= 7.0.5), xlibs-dev, libgtk1.2-dev, libglib1.2-dev
 6 Standards-Version: 3.8.4
 7 Vcs-Git: git://git.debian.org/git/collab-maint/gentoo.git
 8 Vcs-browser: http://git.debian.org/?p=collab-maint/gentoo.git
 9 Homepage: &gentoo;
10
11 Package: gentoo
12 Architecture: any
13 Depends: ${shlibs:Depends}, ${misc:Depends}
14 Suggests: file
15 Description: fully GUI-configurable, two-pane X file manager
16  gentoo is a two-pane file manager for the X Window System. gentoo lets the
17  user do (almost) all of the configuration and customizing from within the
18  program itself. If you still prefer to hand-edit configuration files,
19  they're fairly easy to work with since they are written in an XML format.
20  .
21  gentoo features a fairly complex and powerful file identification system,
22  coupled to an object-oriented style system, which together give you a lot
23  of control over how files of different types are displayed and acted upon.
24  Additionally, over a hundred pixmap images are available for use in file
25  type descriptions.
26  .
29  gentoo was written from scratch in ANSI C, and it utilizes the GTK+ toolkit
30  for its interface.
</screen>
<para>
(I've added the line numbers.)
</para>
</section>
<section id="copyright"><title><filename>copyright</filename></title>
<para>
This file contains information about the copyright and license of the upstream sources.
<ulink url="&policy-copyright;">Debian Policy Manual, 12.5 "Copyright information"</ulink>
dictates its content and
<ulink url="&dep5;">DEP-5: Machine-parseable <filename>debian/copyright</filename></ulink>
provides guidelines for its format.
</para>
<para>
<command>dh_make</command> can give you a template
<filename>copyright</filename> file.  Let's use the <literal>--copyright
gpl2</literal> option here to get a template file for the <systemitem role="package">gentoo</systemitem> package released under GPL-2.
</para>
<para>
You must fill in missing information to complete this file, such as the place you got the package
from, the actual copyright notice, and the license.  For certain
common free software licenses (GNU GPL-1, GNU GPL-2, GNU GPL-3,
LGPL-2, LGPL-2.1, LGPL-3, GNU FDL-1.2, GNU FDL-1.3, Apache-2.0, or the Artistic
license), you can just refer to the appropriate file in the
<filename>/usr/share/common-licenses/</filename> directory that exists on every
Debian system.  Otherwise, you must include the complete license.
</para>
<para>
In short, here's what <systemitem role="package">gentoo</systemitem>'s
<filename>copyright</filename> file should look like:
</para>
<screen>
 1 Format-Specification: http://svn.debian.org/wsvn/dep/web/deps/dep5.mdwn?op=file&amp;rev=135
 2 Name: gentoo
 3 Maintainer: Josip Rodin &lt;joy-mg@debian.org&gt;
 4 Source: http://sourceforge.net/projects/gentoo/files/
 5
 6 Copyright: 1998-2010 Emil Brink &lt;emil@obsession.se&gt;
 7 License: GPL-2+
 8
 9 Files: icons/*
10 Copyright: 1998 Johan Hanson &lt;johan@tiq.com&gt;
11 License: GPL-2+
12
13 Files: debian/*
14 Copyright: 1998-2010 Josip Rodin &lt;joy-mg@debian.org&gt;
15 License: GPL-2+
16
17 License: GPL-2+
18  This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
19  it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
20  the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of the License, or
21  (at your option) any later version. 
22  .
23  This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
24  but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
25  MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. See the
26  GNU General Public License for more details.
27  .
28  You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License along
29  with this program; if not, write to the Free Software Foundation, Inc.,
30  51 Franklin Street, Fifth Floor, Boston, MA 02110-1301 USA.
31  .
32  On Debian systems, the full text of the GNU General Public
33  License version 2 can be found in the file
34  `/usr/share/common-licenses/GPL-2'.
</screen>
<para>
(I've added the line numbers.)
</para>
<para>
Please follow the HOWTO provided by the ftpmasters and sent to
debian-devel-announce: <ulink url="&howto-copyright;"/>.
</para>
</section>
<section id="changelog"><title><filename>changelog</filename></title>
<para>
This is a required file, which has a special format described in
<ulink url="&policy-dpkgchangelog;">Debian Policy Manual, 4.4 "debian/changelog"</ulink>.
This format is used by <command>dpkg</command> and other programs to obtain the
version number, revision, distribution, and urgency of your package.
</para>
<para>
For you, it is also important, since it is good to have documented all changes
you have done.  It will help people downloading your package to see whether
there are issues with the package that they should know about.  It will be
saved as <filename>/usr/share/doc/gentoo/changelog.Debian.gz</filename> in the
binary package.
</para>
<para>
<command>dh_make</command> created a default one, and this is what it looks
like:
</para>
<screen>
1  gentoo (0.9.12-1) unstable; urgency=low
2
3   * Initial release (Closes: #<replaceable>nnnn</replaceable>)  &lt;<replaceable>nnnn</replaceable> is the bug number of your ITP&gt;
4
5  -- Josip Rodin &lt;joy-mg@debian.org&gt;  Mon, 22 Mar 2010 00:37:31 +0100
6
</screen>
<para>
(I've added the line numbers.)
</para>
<para>
Line 1 is the package name, version, distribution, and urgency.  The name must
match the source package name; distribution should be
<literal>unstable</literal>, and urgency
shouldn't be changed to anything higher than <literal>low</literal>.  :-)
</para>
<para>
Lines 3-5 are a log entry, where you document changes made in this package
revision (not the upstream changes - there is a special file for that purpose,
created by the upstream authors, which you will later install as
<filename>/usr/share/doc/gentoo/changelog.gz</filename>).  Let's assume your
ITP (Intent To Package) bug report number was <literal>12345</literal>.  New
lines must be inserted just below the uppermost line that begins with
<literal>*</literal> (asterisk).  You can do it with <citerefentry>
<refentrytitle>dch</refentrytitle> <manvolnum>1</manvolnum> </citerefentry>, or
manually with a text editor.
</para>
<para>
In order to prevent a package being accidentally uploaded before completing the
package, it is good idea to change the distribution value to an invalid
distribution value <literal>UNRELEASED</literal>.
</para>
<para>
You will end up with something like this:
</para>
<screen>
1  gentoo (0.9.12-1) UNRELEASED; urgency=low
2
3   * Initial Release. Closes: #12345
4   * This is my first Debian package.
5   * Adjusted the Makefile to fix $(DESTDIR) problems.
6
7  -- Josip Rodin &lt;joy-mg@debian.org&gt;  Mon, 22 Mar 2010 00:37:31 +0100
8
</screen>
<para>
(I've added the line numbers.)
</para>
<para>
Once you are satisfied with all the changes and documented them in
<filename>changelog</filename>, you should change the distribution value from
<literal>UNRELEASED</literal> to the target distribution value
<literal>unstable</literal> (or even <literal>experimental</literal>).  <footnote><para>If you
use the <literal>dch -r</literal> command to make this last change,  please
make sure to save the <filename>changelog</filename> file explicitly by the
editor.</para></footnote>
</para>
<para>
You can read more about updating the <filename>changelog</filename> file later
in <xref linkend="update"/>.
</para>
</section>
<section id="rules"><title><filename>rules</filename></title>
<para>
Now we need to take a look at the exact rules which <citerefentry>
<refentrytitle>dpkg-buildpackage</refentrytitle> <manvolnum>1</manvolnum>
</citerefentry> will use to actually create the package.  This file is in fact
another <filename>Makefile</filename>, but different from the one(s) in the
upstream source.  Unlike other files in <filename>debian</filename>, this one
is marked as executable.
</para>
<section id="targets"><title>Targets of the <filename>rules</filename> file</title>
<para>
Every <filename>rules</filename> file, like any other
<filename>Makefile</filename>, consists of several rules, each of
which defines a target and how it is carried out.
<footnote><para>You can start learning how to write <filename>Makefile</filename> from 
<ulink url="&debref-make;">Debian Reference, 12.2. "Make"</ulink>.  
The full documentation is available as 
<ulink url="&gnu-make;"></ulink> or as the
<systemitem role="package">make-doc</systemitem> package in the <literal>non-free</literal> archive area.
</para></footnote>
A new rule begins with its target declaration in the first column.  The
following lines beginning with the TAB code (ASCII 9) specify the recipe for
carrying out that target.
Empty lines and lines beginning with <literal>#</literal> (hash) are treated as
comments and ignored.
<footnote><para><ulink url="&policy-debianrules;">Debian
Policy Manual, 4.9 "Main building script: debian/rules"</ulink> explains the
details.</para></footnote>
</para>
<para>
A rule that you want to execute is invoked by its target name as a command line argument.  For
example, <literal>debian/rules <replaceable>build</replaceable></literal> and
<literal>fakeroot make -f debian/rules <replaceable>binary</replaceable></literal>
execute rules for <literal><replaceable>build</replaceable></literal> and
<literal><replaceable>binary</replaceable></literal> targets respectively.
</para>
<para>
Here is a simplified explanation of the targets:
</para>
<itemizedlist>
<listitem>
<para>
<literal>clean</literal> target: to clean all compiled, generated, and useless
files in the build-tree.  (Required)
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
<literal>build</literal> target: to build the source into compiled programs and
formatted documents in the build-tree.  (Required)
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
<literal>install</literal> target: to install files into a file tree for each
binary package under the <filename>debian</filename> directory.  If defined,
<literal>binary*</literal> targets effectively depend on this target.
(Optional)
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
<literal>binary</literal> target: to create all binary packages (effectively
a combination of <literal>binary-arch</literal> and
<literal>binary-indep</literal> targets).  (Required)<footnote><para> This
target is used by <literal>dpkg-buildpackage</literal> as in <xref linkend="completebuild"/>.  </para> </footnote>
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
<literal>binary-arch</literal> target: to create arch-dependent
(<literal>Architecture: any</literal>) binary packages in the parent directory.
(Required)<footnote><para> This target is used by <literal>dpkg-buildpackage
-B</literal> as in <xref linkend="autobuilder"/>.  </para> </footnote>
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
<literal>binary-indep</literal> target: to create arch-independent
(<literal>Architecture: all</literal>) binary packages in the parent directory.
(Required)<footnote><para> This target is used by <literal>dpkg-buildpackage
-A</literal>.  </para> </footnote>
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
<literal>get-orig-source</literal> target: to obtain the most recent version of
the original source package from an upstream archive.  (Optional)
</para>
</listitem>
</itemizedlist>
<para>
You are probably overwhelmed by now, but things are much simpler upon examination of the
<filename>rules</filename> file that <command>dh_make</command> gives us as a
default.
</para>
</section>
<section id="defaultrules"><title>Default <filename>rules</filename> file</title>
<para>
Newer <command>dh_make</command> generates a very simple but powerful default
<filename>rules</filename> file using the <command>dh</command> command:
</para>
<screen>
 1 #!/usr/bin/make -f
 2 # -*- makefile -*-
 3 # Sample debian/rules that uses debhelper.
 4 # This file was originally written by Joey Hess and Craig Small.
 5 # As a special exception, when this file is copied by dh-make into a
 6 # dh-make output file, you may use that output file without restriction.
 7 # This special exception was added by Craig Small in version 0.37 of dh-make.
 8
 9 # Uncomment this to turn on verbose mode.
10 #export DH_VERBOSE=1
11
12 %:
13        dh $@
</screen>
<para>
(I've added the line numbers.  In the actual <filename>rules</filename> file,
the leading spaces are a TAB code.)
</para>
<para>
You are probably familiar with lines like line 1 from shell and Perl scripts.
It tells the operating system that this file is to be processed with
<filename>/usr/bin/make</filename>.
</para>
<para>
Line 10 can be uncommented to set the <literal>DH_VERBOSE</literal> variable to 1,
so that the <command>dh</command> command outputs which
<command>dh_*</command> commands it is executing.
You can also add a line <literal>export DH_OPTIONS=-v</literal> here,
so that each <command>dh_*</command> command outputs which commands it
is executing.  This helps you to understand
exactly what is going on behind this simple <filename>rules</filename> file and
to debug its problems.  This new <command>dh</command> is designed to form a core part of the
<systemitem role="package">debhelper</systemitem> tools, and not to hide
anything from you.
</para>
<para>
Lines 12 and 13 are where all the work is done with an implicit rule using the pattern rule.  The percent sign means "any
targets", which then call a single program, <command>dh</command>, with the target
name.  <footnote><para> This uses the new <systemitem role="package">debhelper</systemitem> v7 features.  Its design concepts are
explained in <ulink url="&debhelper-slides;">Not Your
Grandpa's Debhelper</ulink> presented at DebConf9 by the <systemitem role="package">debhelper</systemitem> upstream.  Under
<literal>lenny</literal>, <command>dh_make</command> created a much more
complicated <filename>rules</filename> file with explicit rules
and many <command>dh_*</command> scripts listed for each one, most of
which are now unnecessary (and show the package's age). The new <command>dh</command> command is
simpler and frees us from doing the routine work "manually". You still have full power to
customize the process with <literal>override_dh_*</literal> targets. See <xref linkend="customrules"/>.  It is based only on the <systemitem role="package">debhelper</systemitem> package and does not obfuscate the
package building process as the <systemitem role="package">cdbs</systemitem>
package tends to.  </para> </footnote> The <command>dh</command> command is a wrapper
script which runs appropriate sequences of <command>dh_*</command> programs
depending on its argument.  <footnote><para> You can verify the actual sequences of
<command>dh_*</command> programs invoked for a given
<literal><replaceable>target</replaceable></literal> without really running them by invoking <literal>dh --no-act
<replaceable>target</replaceable></literal> or <literal>debian/rules --
'--no-act <replaceable>target</replaceable>'</literal>.  </para> </footnote>
</para>
<itemizedlist>
<listitem>
<para>
<literal>debian/rules clean</literal> runs <literal>dh clean</literal>, which
in turn runs the following:
</para>
<screen>
dh_testdir
dh_auto_clean
dh_clean
</screen>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
<literal>debian/rules build</literal> runs <literal>dh build</literal>; which
in turn runs the following:
</para>
<screen>
dh_testdir
dh_auto_configure
dh_auto_build
dh_auto_test
</screen>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
<literal>fakeroot debian/rules binary</literal> runs <literal>fakeroot dh
binary</literal>; which in turn runs the following<footnote><para>The following
example assumes your <filename>debian/compat</filename> has a value equal or
more than 9 to avoid invoking any python support commands automatically.
</para>
</footnote>:
</para>
<screen>
dh_testroot
dh_prep
dh_installdirs
dh_auto_install
dh_install
dh_installdocs
dh_installchangelogs
dh_installexamples
dh_installman
dh_installcatalogs
dh_installcron
dh_installdebconf
dh_installemacsen
dh_installifupdown
dh_installinfo
dh_installinit
dh_installmenu
dh_installmime
dh_installmodules
dh_installlogcheck
dh_installlogrotate
dh_installpam
dh_installppp
dh_installudev
dh_installwm
dh_installxfonts
dh_bugfiles
dh_lintian
dh_gconf
dh_icons
dh_perl
dh_usrlocal
dh_link
dh_compress
dh_fixperms
dh_strip
dh_makeshlibs
dh_shlibdeps
dh_installdeb
dh_gencontrol
dh_md5sums
dh_builddeb
</screen>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
<literal>fakeroot debian/rules binary-arch</literal> runs <literal>fakeroot dh
binary-arch</literal>; which in turn runs the same sequence as
<literal>fakeroot dh binary</literal> but with the <literal>-a</literal> option
appended for each command.
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
<literal>fakeroot debian/rules binary-indep</literal> runs <literal>fakeroot dh
binary-indep</literal>; which in turn runs almost the same sequence as
<literal>fakeroot dh binary</literal> but excluding
<command>dh_strip</command>, <command>dh_makeshlibs</command>, and
<command>dh_shlibdeps</command> with the <literal>-i</literal> option appended
for each remaining command.
</para>
</listitem>
</itemizedlist>
<para>
The functions of <command>dh_*</command> commands are largely self-evident from
their names.  <footnote><para> For complete information on what all these
<command>dh_*</command> scripts do exactly, and what their other options are,
please read their respective manual pages and the <systemitem role="package">debhelper</systemitem> documentation.  </para> </footnote> There
are a few notable ones that are worth giving (over)simplified explanations here assuming
a typical build environment based on a <filename>Makefile</filename>.
<footnote><para> These commands support other build environments such as
<filename>setup.py</filename> which can be listed by executing
<literal>dh_auto_build --list</literal> in a package source directory.  </para>
</footnote>
</para>
<itemizedlist>
<listitem>
<para>
<command>dh_auto_clean</command> usually executes the following if a
<filename>Makefile</filename> exists with the <literal>distclean</literal>
target.  <footnote><para> It actually looks for the first available target
in the <filename>Makefile</filename> out of
<literal>distclean</literal>, <literal>realclean</literal>, or
<literal>clean</literal>, and executes that.
</para> </footnote>
</para>
<screen>
make distclean
</screen>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
<command>dh_auto_configure</command> usually executes the following if
<filename>./configure</filename> exists (arguments abbreviated for
readability).
</para>
<screen>
./configure --prefix=/usr --sysconfdir=/etc --localstatedir=/var ...
</screen>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
<command>dh_auto_build</command> usually executes the following to execute the
first target of <filename>Makefile</filename> if it exists.
</para>
<screen>
make
</screen>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
<command>dh_auto_test</command> usually executes the following if a
<filename>Makefile</filename> exists with the <literal>test</literal> target.
<footnote><para> It actually looks for the first available target in
the <filename>Makefile</filename> out of <literal>test</literal> or
<literal>check</literal>, and executes that.</para> </footnote>
</para>
<screen>
make test
</screen>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
<command>dh_auto_install</command> usually executes the following if a
<filename>Makefile</filename> exists with the <literal>install</literal> target
(line folded for readability).
</para>
<screen>
make install \
  DESTDIR=<replaceable>/path/to</replaceable>/<replaceable>package</replaceable>_<replaceable>version</replaceable>-<replaceable>revision</replaceable>/debian/<replaceable>package</replaceable>
</screen>
</listitem>
</itemizedlist>
<para>
All targets which require the <command>fakeroot</command> command will contain
<command>dh_testroot</command>, which exits with an error if you are not
using this command to pretend to be root.
</para>
<para>
The important part to know about the <filename>rules</filename> file created by
<command>dh_make</command> is that it is just a suggestion.  It will work for
most packages but for more complicated ones, don't be afraid to customize it to
fit your needs.
</para>
<para>
Although <literal>install</literal> is not a required target, it is supported.
<literal>fakeroot dh install</literal> behaves like <literal>fakeroot dh
binary</literal> but stops after <command>dh_fixperms</command>.
</para>
</section>
<section id="customrules"><title>Customization of <filename>rules</filename> file</title>
<para>
There are many ways to customize the <filename>rules</filename> file created
with the new <command>dh</command> command.
</para>
<para>
The <literal>dh $@</literal> command can be customized as follows.
<footnote><para> If a package installs the
<filename>/usr/share/perl5/Debian/Debhelper/Sequence/<replaceable>custom_name</replaceable>.pm</filename>
file, you should activate its customization function by <literal>dh $@ --with
<replaceable>custom-name</replaceable></literal>.  </para> </footnote>
</para>
<itemizedlist>
<listitem>
<para>
Add support for the <command>dh_python2</command> command.  (The best choice
for Python.) <footnote><para> Use of the <command>dh_python2</command> command
is preferred over use of <command>dh_pysupport</command> or
<command>dh_pycentral</command> commands.  Do not use the
<command>dh_python</command> command.  </para> </footnote>
</para>
<itemizedlist>
<listitem>
<para>
Include the <systemitem role="package">python</systemitem> package in
<literal>Build-Depends</literal>.
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
Use <literal>dh $@ --with python2</literal>.
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
This handles Python modules using the <systemitem role="package">python</systemitem> framework.
</para>
</listitem>
</itemizedlist>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
Add support for the <command>dh_pysupport</command> command. (deprecated)
</para>
<itemizedlist>
<listitem>
<para>
Include the <systemitem role="package">python-support</systemitem> package in
<literal>Build-Depends</literal>.
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
Use <literal>dh $@ --with pysupport</literal>.
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
This handles Python modules using the <systemitem role="package">python-support</systemitem> framework.
</para>
</listitem>
</itemizedlist>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
Add support for the <command>dh_pycentral</command> command. (deprecated)
</para>
<itemizedlist>
<listitem>
<para>
Include the <systemitem role="package">python-central</systemitem> package in
<literal>Build-Depends</literal>.
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
Use <literal>dh $@ --with python-central</literal> instead.
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
This also deactivates the <command>dh_pysupport</command> command.
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
This handles Python modules using the <systemitem role="package">python-central</systemitem> framework.
</para>
</listitem>
</itemizedlist>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
Add support for the <command>dh_installtex</command> command.
</para>
<itemizedlist>
<listitem>
<para>
Include the <systemitem role="package">tex-common</systemitem> package in
<literal>Build-Depends</literal>.
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
Use <literal>dh $@ --with tex</literal> instead.
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
This registers Type 1 fonts, hyphenation patterns, and formats with TeX.
</para>
</listitem>
</itemizedlist>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
Add support for the <command>dh_quilt_patch</command> and
<command>dh_quilt_unpatch</command> commands.
</para>
<itemizedlist>
<listitem>
<para>
Include the <systemitem role="package">quilt</systemitem> package in
<literal>Build-Depends</literal>.
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
Use <literal>dh $@ --with quilt</literal> instead.
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
This applies and un-applies patches to the upstream source from files in the
<filename>debian/patches</filename> directory for a source package in the <literal>1.0</literal> format.
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
This is not needed if you use the new <literal>3.0 (quilt)</literal> source
package format.
</para>
</listitem>
</itemizedlist>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
Add support for the <command>dh_dkms</command> command.
</para>
<itemizedlist>
<listitem>
<para>
Include the <systemitem role="package">dkms</systemitem> package in
<literal>Build-Depends</literal>.
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
Use <literal>dh $@ --with dkms</literal> instead.
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
This correctly handles DKMS usage by kernel module packages.
</para>
</listitem>
</itemizedlist>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
Add support for the <command>dh_autotools-dev_updateconfig</command> and
<command>dh_autotools-dev_restoreconfig</command> commands.
</para>
<itemizedlist>
<listitem>
<para>
Include the <systemitem role="package">autotools-dev</systemitem> package in
<literal>Build-Depends</literal>.
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
Use <literal>dh $@ --with autotools-dev</literal> instead.
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
This updates and restores <filename>config.sub</filename> and
<filename>config.guess</filename>.
</para>
</listitem>
</itemizedlist>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
Add support for the <command>dh_autoreconf</command> and
<command>dh_autoreconf_clean</command> commands.
</para>
<itemizedlist>
<listitem>
<para>
Include the <systemitem role="package">dh-autoreconf</systemitem> package in
<literal>Build-Depends</literal>.
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
Use <literal>dh $@ --with autoreconf</literal> instead.
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
This updates the GNU Build System files and restores them after the build.
</para>
</listitem>
</itemizedlist>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
Add support for the <command>dh_girepository</command> command.
</para>
<itemizedlist>
<listitem>
<para>
Includes the <systemitem role="package">gobject-introspection</systemitem> package in
<literal>Build-Depends</literal>.
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
Use <literal>dh $@ --with gir</literal> instead.
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
This computes dependencies for packages shipping GObject introspection data and 
generates the <literal>${gir:Depends}</literal> substitution variable for the package dependency.
</para>
</listitem>
</itemizedlist>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
Add support for the <command>bash</command> completion feature.
</para>
<itemizedlist>
<listitem>
<para>
Includes the <systemitem role="package">bash-completion</systemitem> package in
<literal>Build-Depends</literal>.
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
Use <literal>dh $@ --with bash-completion</literal> instead.
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
This installs <command>bash</command> completions using a configuration file at
<filename>debian/<replaceable>package</replaceable>.bash-completion</filename>.
</para>
</listitem>
</itemizedlist>
</listitem>
</itemizedlist>
<para>
Many <command>dh_*</command> commands invoked by the new <command>dh</command>
command can be customized by the corresponding configuration files in the
<filename>debian</filename> directory.  See <xref linkend="dother"/> and the
manpage of each command for the customization of such features.
</para>
<para>
You may need to run <command>dh_*</command> commands invoked via the new <command>dh</command>
with added arguments, or to run additional commands with them, or to skip them.
For such cases, you create an
<literal>override_dh_<replaceable>foo</replaceable></literal> target with its
rule in the <filename>rules</filename> file defining an
<literal>override_dh_<replaceable>foo</replaceable></literal> target for the
<command>dh_<replaceable>foo</replaceable></command> command you want to
change.  It basically says <emphasis>run me instead</emphasis>.
<footnote><para> Under <literal>lenny</literal>, if you wanted to change the
behavior of a <command>dh_*</command> script you found the relevant line in the
<filename>rules</filename> file and adjusted it.  </para> </footnote>
</para>
<para>
Please note that the <command>dh_auto_*</command> commands tend to do more than
what has been discussed in this (over)simplified explanation to take care of all the
corner cases.  It is a bad idea to use <literal>override_dh_*</literal> targets
to substitute simplified equivalent commands (except for the
<literal>override_dh_auto_clean</literal> target) since it may
bypass such smart <systemitem role="package">debhelper</systemitem> features.
</para>
<para>
So, for instance, if you want to store system configuration data in the
<filename>/etc/gentoo</filename> directory instead of the usual
<filename>/etc</filename> directory for the recent 
<systemitem role="package">gentoo</systemitem> package using Autotools, you can override the default
<literal>--sysconfig=/etc</literal> argument given by the
<command>dh_auto_configure</command> command to the
<command>./configure</command> command by the following.
</para>
<screen>
override_dh_auto_configure:
        dh_auto_configure -- --sysconfig=/etc/gentoo
</screen>
<para>
The arguments given after <literal>--</literal> are appended to the default
arguments of the auto-executed program to override them.  Using the
<command>dh_auto_configure</command> command is better than directly invoking the
<command>./configure</command> command here since it will only override the
<literal>--sysconfig</literal> argument and retains any other, benign arguments
to the <command>./configure</command> command.
</para>
<para>
If the <filename>Makefile</filename> in the source for <systemitem role="package">gentoo</systemitem> requires you to specify
<literal>build</literal> as its target to build it <footnote><para>
<command>dh_auto_build</command> without any arguments will execute the first
target in the <filename>Makefile</filename>.  </para> </footnote>, you
create an <literal>override_dh_auto_build</literal> target to enable this.
</para>
<screen>
override_dh_auto_build:
        dh_auto_build -- build
</screen>
<para>
This ensures <literal>$(MAKE)</literal> is run with all the default arguments given by the
<command>dh_auto_build</command> command plus the <literal>build</literal> argument.
</para>
<para>
If the <filename>Makefile</filename> in the source for <systemitem role="package">gentoo</systemitem> requires you to specify the
<literal>packageclean</literal> target to clean it for the Debian package instead
of using <literal>distclean</literal> or <literal>clean</literal> targets,
you can create an
<literal>override_dh_auto_clean</literal> target to enable thit.
</para>
<screen>
override_dh_auto_clean:
        $(MAKE) packageclean
</screen>
<para>
If the <filename>Makefile</filename> in the source for <systemitem role="package">gentoo</systemitem> contains a <literal>test</literal> target
which you do not want to run for the Debian package building process, you can
use an empty <literal>override_dh_auto_test</literal> target to skip it.
</para>
<screen>
override_dh_auto_test:
</screen>
<para>
If <systemitem role="package">gentoo</systemitem> has an unusual upstream
changelog file called <filename>FIXES</filename>,
<command>dh_installchangelogs</command> will not install that file by default.
The <command>dh_installchangelogs</command> command requires
<filename>FIXES</filename> as its argument to install it.  <footnote><para> The
<filename>debian/changelog</filename> and <filename>debian/NEWS</filename>
files are always automatically installed.  The upstream changelog is found
by converting filenames to lower case and matching them against
<filename>changelog</filename>, <filename>changes</filename>,
<filename>changelog.txt</filename>, and <filename>changes.txt</filename>.
</para> </footnote>
</para>
<screen>
override_dh_installchangelogs:
        dh_installchangelogs FIXES
</screen>
<para>
When you use the new <command>dh</command> command, use of explicit targets
such as the ones listed in <xref linkend="targets"/>, other than the
<literal>get-orig-source</literal> target, may make it difficult to understand
their exact effects.  Please limit explicit targets to
<literal>override_dh_*</literal> targets and completely independent ones, if
possible.
</para>
</section>
</section>
</chapter>
<chapter id="dother"><title>Other files under the <filename>debian</filename> directory</title>
<para>
To control most of what <systemitem role="package">debhelper</systemitem> does
while building the package, you put optional configuration files under the
<filename>debian</filename> directory.  This chapter will provide an overview of
what each of these does and its format.  Please read the <ulink url="&debian-policy;">Debian Policy
Manual</ulink> and <ulink url="&developers-reference;">Debian Developer's
Reference</ulink> for guidelines for packaging.
</para>
<para>
The <command>dh_make</command> command will create some template configuration
files under the <filename>debian</filename> directory.  Most of them come with
filenames suffixed by <literal>.ex</literal>.  Some of them come with filenames
prefixed by the binary package name such as
<literal><replaceable>package</replaceable></literal>.  Take a look at all of
them.
<footnote><para>
In this chapter, files in the <filename>debian</filename> directory are
referred to without the leading <filename>debian/</filename> for simplicity whenever
the meaning is obvious.
</para></footnote>
</para>
<para>
Some template configuration files for <systemitem role="package">debhelper</systemitem>
may not be created by the <command>dh_make</command> command.  In
such cases, you need to create them with an editor.
</para>
<para>
If you wish or need to activate any of these, please do the following:
</para>
<itemizedlist>
<listitem>
<para>
rename template files by removing the <literal>.ex</literal> or
<literal>.EX</literal> suffix if they have one;
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
rename the configuration files to use the actual binary package
name in place of <literal><replaceable>package</replaceable></literal>;
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
modify template file contents to suit your needs;
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
remove template files which you do not need;
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
modify the <filename>control</filename> file (see <xref linkend="control"/>),
if necessary;
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
modify the <filename>rules</filename> file (see <xref linkend="rules"/>), if
necessary.
</para>
</listitem>
</itemizedlist>
<para>
Any <systemitem role="package">debhelper</systemitem> configuration files
without a <filename><replaceable>package</replaceable></filename> prefix, such as
<filename>install</filename>, apply to the first binary package.  When there are
many binary packages, their configurations can be specified by prefixing their
name to their configuration filenames such as
<filename><replaceable>package-1</replaceable>.install</filename>,
<filename><replaceable>package-2</replaceable>.install</filename>, etc.
</para>
<section id="readme"><title><filename>README.Debian</filename></title>
<para>
Any extra details or discrepancies between the original package and your Debian
version should be documented here.
</para>
<para>
<command>dh_make</command> created a default one; this is what it looks like:
</para>
<screen>
gentoo for Debian
-----------------
&lt;possible notes regarding this package - if none, delete this file&gt;
 -- Josip Rodin &lt;joy-mg@debian.org&gt;, Wed, 11 Nov 1998 21:02:14 +0100
</screen>
<para>
If you have nothing to be documented, remove this file.  See <citerefentry>
<refentrytitle>dh_installdocs</refentrytitle> <manvolnum>1</manvolnum>
</citerefentry>.
</para>
</section>
<section id="compat"><title><filename>compat</filename></title>
<para>
The <filename>compat</filename> file defines the <systemitem role="package">debhelper</systemitem> compatibility level.  Currently, you
should set it to the <systemitem role="package">debhelper</systemitem> v7 as
follows:
</para>
<screen>
$ echo 7 &gt; debian/compat
</screen>
</section>
<section id="conffiles"><title><filename>conffiles</filename></title>
<para>
One of the most annoying things about software is when you spend a great deal
of time and effort customizing a program, only to have an upgrade stomp all
over your changes.  Debian solves this problem by marking such configuration files as conffiles.
<footnote><para>See <citerefentry> <refentrytitle>dpkg</refentrytitle>
<manvolnum>1</manvolnum> </citerefentry> and
<ulink url="&policy-conffiles;">Debian Policy Manual, "D.2.5 Conffiles"</ulink>.
</para></footnote>
When you upgrade a package, you'll be asked whether you want to keep
your old configuration files or not.
</para>
<para>
<citerefentry><refentrytitle>dh_installdeb</refentrytitle> <manvolnum>1</manvolnum>
</citerefentry> <emphasis>automatically</emphasis> flags any files under
the <filename>/etc</filename> directory as conffiles, so if your program only
has conffiles there you do not need to specify them in this file.  For most
package types, the only place conffiles should ever be is under
<filename>/etc</filename>, and so this file doesn't need to exist.
</para>
<para>
If your program uses configuration files but also rewrites them on its own,
it's best not to make them conffiles because <command>dpkg</command> will
then prompt users to verify the changes all the time.
</para>
<para>
If the program you're packaging requires every user to modify the configuration
files in the <filename>/etc</filename> directory, there are two popular ways to
arrange for them to not be conffiles, keeping <command>dpkg</command> quiet.
</para>
<itemizedlist>
<listitem>
<para>
Create a symlink under the <filename>/etc</filename> directory pointing to a
file under the <filename>/var</filename> directory generated by the
maintainer scripts.
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
Create a file generated by the maintainer scripts under the <filename>/etc</filename> directory.
</para>
</listitem>
</itemizedlist>
<para>
For information on maintainer scripts, see <xref linkend="maintscripts"/>.
</para>
</section>
<section id="crond"><title><filename><replaceable>package</replaceable>.cron.*</filename></title>
<para>
If your package requires regularly scheduled tasks to operate properly, you can
use these files to set that up.  You can set up regular tasks that either happen
hourly, daily, weekly, or monthly, or alternatively happen at any other time that
you wish.  The filenames are:
</para>
<itemizedlist>
<listitem>
<para>
<filename><replaceable>package</replaceable>.cron.hourly</filename> - Installed as
<filename>/etc/cron.hourly/<replaceable>package</replaceable></filename>; run
once an hour.
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
<filename><replaceable>package</replaceable>.cron.daily</filename> - Installed as
<filename>/etc/cron.daily/<replaceable>package</replaceable></filename>; run
once a day.
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
<filename><replaceable>package</replaceable>.cron.weekly</filename> - Installed as
<filename>/etc/cron.weekly/<replaceable>package</replaceable></filename>; run
once a week.
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
<filename><replaceable>package</replaceable>.cron.monthly</filename> - Installed as
<filename>/etc/cron.monthly/<replaceable>package</replaceable></filename>: run
once a month.
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
<filename><replaceable>package</replaceable>.cron.d</filename> - Installed as
<filename>/etc/cron.d/<replaceable>package</replaceable></filename>: for any
other time.
</para>
</listitem>
</itemizedlist>
<para>
Most of these files are shell scripts, with the exception of
<filename><replaceable>package</replaceable>.cron.d</filename> which follows
the format of <citerefentry> <refentrytitle>crontab</refentrytitle>
<manvolnum>5</manvolnum> </citerefentry>.
</para>
<para>
No explicit <filename>cron.*</filename> file is needed to set up log rotation;
for that, see
<citerefentry><refentrytitle>dh_installlogrotate</refentrytitle>
<manvolnum>1</manvolnum></citerefentry> and
<citerefentry><refentrytitle>logrotate</refentrytitle><manvolnum>8</manvolnum></citerefentry>.
</para>
</section>
<section id="dirs"><title><filename>dirs</filename></title>
<para>
This file specifies any directories which we need but which are not created by the normal installation
procedure (<literal>make install DESTDIR=...</literal> invoked by
<literal>dh_auto_install</literal>).  This generally
means there is a problem with the <filename>Makefile</filename>.
</para>
<para>
Files listed in an <filename>install</filename> file don't need their
directories created first.  See <xref linkend="install"/>.
</para>
<para>
It is best to try to run the installation first and only use this if you
run into trouble.  There is no preceding slash on the directory names listed in
the <filename>dirs</filename> file.
</para>
</section>
<section id="doc-base"><title><filename><replaceable>package</replaceable>.doc-base</filename></title>
<para>
If your package has documentation other than manual and info pages, you
should use the <systemitem role="package">doc-base</systemitem> file to
register it, so the user can find it with e.g.  <citerefentry>
<refentrytitle>dhelp</refentrytitle> <manvolnum>1</manvolnum> </citerefentry>,
<citerefentry> <refentrytitle>dwww</refentrytitle> <manvolnum>1</manvolnum>
</citerefentry>, or <citerefentry> <refentrytitle>doccentral</refentrytitle>
<manvolnum>1</manvolnum> </citerefentry>.
</para>
<para>
This usually includes HTML, PS and PDF files, shipped in
<filename>/usr/share/doc/<replaceable>packagename</replaceable>/</filename>.
</para>
<para>
This is what <systemitem role="package">gentoo</systemitem>'s doc-base file
<filename>gentoo.doc-base</filename> looks like:
</para>
<screen>
Document: gentoo
Title: Gentoo Manual
Author: Emil Brink
Abstract: This manual describes what Gentoo is, and how it can be used.
Section: File Management
Format: HTML
Index: /usr/share/doc/gentoo/html/index.html
Files: /usr/share/doc/gentoo/html/*.html
</screen>
<para>
For information on the file format, see <citerefentry>
<refentrytitle>install-docs</refentrytitle> <manvolnum>8</manvolnum>
</citerefentry> and the Debian <systemitem role="package">doc-base</systemitem>
Manual at the local copy <filename>&doc-base;</filename> provided by the
<systemitem role="package">doc-base</systemitem> package.
</para>
<para>
For more details on installing additional documentation, look in <xref linkend="destdir"/>.
</para>
</section>
<section id="docs"><title><filename>docs</filename></title>
<para>
This file specifies the file names of documentation files we can have
<citerefentry> <refentrytitle>dh_installdocs</refentrytitle>
<manvolnum>1</manvolnum> </citerefentry> install into the temporary directory
for us.
</para>
<para>
By default, it will include all existing files in the top-level source
directory that are called <filename>BUGS</filename>,
<filename>README*</filename>, <filename>TODO</filename> etc.
</para>
<para>
For <systemitem role="package">gentoo</systemitem>, some other files
are also included:
</para>
<screen>
BUGS
CONFIG-CHANGES
CREDITS
NEWS
README
README.gtkrc
TODO
</screen>
</section>
<section id="emacsen"><title><filename>emacsen-*</filename></title>
<para>
If your package supplies Emacs files that can be bytecompiled at package
installation time, you can use these files to set it up.
</para>
<para>
They are installed into the temporary directory by <citerefentry>
<refentrytitle>dh_installemacsen</refentrytitle> <manvolnum>1</manvolnum>
</citerefentry>.
</para>
<para>
If you don't need these, remove them.
</para>
</section>
<section id="examples"><title><filename><replaceable>package</replaceable>.examples</filename></title>
<para>
The <citerefentry> <refentrytitle>dh_installexamples</refentrytitle>
<manvolnum>1</manvolnum> </citerefentry> command installs files and directories
listed in this file as example files.
</para>
</section>
<section id="initd"><title><filename><replaceable>package</replaceable>.init</filename> and <filename><replaceable>package</replaceable>.default</filename></title>
<para>
If your package is a daemon that needs to be run at system start-up, you've
obviously disregarded my initial recommendation, haven't you?  :-)
</para>
<para>
The <filename><replaceable>package</replaceable>.init</filename> file is
installed as the
<filename>/etc/init.d/<replaceable>package</replaceable></filename> script
which starts and stops the daemon.
Its fairly generic skeleton template is provided by the
<command>dh_make</command> command as <filename>init.d.ex</filename>.  You'll
likely have to rename and edit it, a lot, while making sure to provide
<ulink url="&lsb;">Linux Standard Base</ulink> (LSB) compliant headers.  It
gets installed into the temporary directory by <citerefentry>
<refentrytitle>dh_installinit</refentrytitle> <manvolnum>1</manvolnum>
</citerefentry>.
</para>
<para>
The <filename><replaceable>package</replaceable>.default</filename> file will
be installed as
<filename>/etc/default/<replaceable>package</replaceable></filename>.  This
file sets defaults that are sourced by the init script.  This
<filename><replaceable>package</replaceable>.default</filename> file
is most often used to disable running a daemon, or to set some default flags or
timeouts.  If your init script has certain configurable
features, you can set them in the <filename><replaceable>package</replaceable>.default</filename> file,
instead of in the init script itself.
</para>
<para>
If your upstream program provides a file for the init script, you can either use it or not.  If you
don't use their init script then create a new one in
<filename><replaceable>package</replaceable>.init</filename>.  However
if the upstream init script looks fine and installs in the right place you
still need to set up the <filename>rc*</filename> symlinks.  To do this you will
need to override <command>dh_installinit</command> in the
<filename>rules</filename> file with the following lines:
</para>
<screen>
override_dh_installinit:
        dh_installinit --onlyscripts
</screen>
<para>
If you don't need this, remove the files.
</para>
</section>
<section id="install"><title><filename>install</filename></title>
<para>
If there are files that need to be installed into your package but your
standard <literal>make install</literal> won't do it, put the filenames and
destinations into this <filename>install</filename> file.  They are installed
by <citerefentry> <refentrytitle>dh_install</refentrytitle>
<manvolnum>1</manvolnum> </citerefentry>.<footnote><para> This replaces the
deprecated <citerefentry> <refentrytitle>dh_movefiles</refentrytitle>
<manvolnum>1</manvolnum> </citerefentry> command which is configured by the
<filename>files</filename> file.  </para> </footnote> You should first check
there is not a more specific tool to use.  For example, documents should be in
the <filename>docs</filename> file and not in this one.
</para>
<para>
This <filename>install</filename> file has one line per file installed, with
the name of the file (relative to the top build directory) then a space then
the installation directory (relative to the install directory).  One example of where this is used is if a binary <filename>src/<replaceable>bar</replaceable></filename> is left uninstalled; the
<filename>install</filename> file might look like:
</para>
<screen>
src/<replaceable>bar</replaceable> usr/bin
</screen>
<para>
This means when this package is installed, there will be an executable command
<filename>/usr/bin/<replaceable>bar</replaceable></filename>.
</para>
<para>
Alternatively, this <filename>install</filename> can have the name of the file
only without the installation directory when the relative directory path does
not change.  This format is usually used for a large package that splits the 
output of its build into multiple binary packages using
<filename><replaceable>package-1</replaceable>.install</filename>,
<filename><replaceable>package-2</replaceable>.install</filename>, etc.
</para>
<para>
The <command>dh_install</command> command will fall back to looking in
<filename>debian/tmp</filename> for files, if it doesn't find them in the
current directory (or wherever you've told it to look using
<literal>--sourcedir</literal>).
</para>
</section>
<section id="info"><title><filename><replaceable>package</replaceable>.info</filename></title>
<para>
If your package has info pages, you should install them using <citerefentry>
<refentrytitle>dh_installinfo</refentrytitle> <manvolnum>1</manvolnum>
</citerefentry> by listing them in a
<filename><replaceable>package</replaceable>.info</filename> file.
</para>
</section>
<section id="links"><title><filename><replaceable>package</replaceable>.links</filename></title>
<para>
If you need to create additional symlinks in package build directories as package maintainer, you should install them using <citerefentry>
<refentrytitle>dh_link</refentrytitle> <manvolnum>1</manvolnum>
</citerefentry> by listing their full paths of source and destination files in a
<filename><replaceable>package</replaceable>.links</filename> file.
</para>
</section>
<section id="lintian"><title><filename>{<replaceable>package</replaceable>.,source/}lintian-overrides</filename></title>
<para>
If <systemitem role="package">lintian</systemitem> reports an erroneous
diagnostic for a case where Debian policy allows exceptions to some rule, you can
use <filename><replaceable>package</replaceable>.lintian-overrides</filename>
or <filename>source/lintian-overrides</filename> to quieten it.  Please read
Lintian User's Manual (<filename>&lintian-doc;</filename>) and refrain
from abusing this.
</para>
<para>
<filename><replaceable>package</replaceable>.lintian-overrides</filename> is
for the binary package named <systemitem role="package"><replaceable>package</replaceable></systemitem> and is installed
into
<filename>usr/share/lintian/overrides/<replaceable>package</replaceable></filename>
by the <command>dh_lintian</command> command.
</para>
<para>
<filename>source/lintian-overrides</filename> is for the source package.  This
is not installed.
</para>
</section>
<section id="manpage"><title><filename>manpage.*</filename></title>
<para>
Your program(s) should have a manual page.  If they don't, you should create
them.  The <command>dh_make</command> command creates some template files for
manual pages.  These need to be copied and edited for each command missing its
manual page.  Please make sure to remove unused templates.
</para>
<section id="manpage1"><title><filename>manpage.1.ex</filename></title>
<para>
Manual pages are normally written in <citerefentry>
<refentrytitle>nroff</refentrytitle> <manvolnum>1</manvolnum> </citerefentry>.
The <filename>manpage.1.ex</filename> template is written in
<command>nroff</command>, too.  See the <citerefentry>
<refentrytitle>man</refentrytitle> <manvolnum>7</manvolnum> </citerefentry>
manual page for a brief description of how to edit such a file.
</para>
<para>
The final manual page file name should give the name of the program it is
documenting, so we will rename it from <literal>manpage</literal> to
<literal>gentoo</literal>.  The file name also includes <literal>.1</literal>
as the first suffix, which means it's a manual page for a user command.  Be
sure to verify that this section is indeed the correct one.  Here's a short
list of manual page sections:
</para>
<informaltable id="manpage-sections" pgwide="0" frame="topbot" rowsep="1" colsep="1">
<tgroup cols="3">
<colspec colwidth="8*" align="left"/> <colspec colwidth="24*" align="left"/> <colspec colwidth="40*" align="left"/>
<thead>
<row> <entry>Section</entry> <entry>Description</entry> <entry>Notes</entry> </row>
</thead>
<tbody>
<row> <entry>1</entry> <entry>User command</entry> <entry>Executable commands or scripts</entry> </row>
<row> <entry>2</entry> <entry>System calls</entry> <entry>Functions provided by the kernel</entry> </row>
<row> <entry>3</entry> <entry>Library calls</entry> <entry>Functions within system libraries</entry> </row>
<row> <entry>4</entry> <entry>Special files</entry> <entry>Usually found in <filename>/dev</filename></entry> </row>
<row> <entry>5</entry> <entry>File formats</entry> <entry>E.g. <filename>/etc/passwd</filename>'s format</entry> </row>
<row> <entry>6</entry> <entry>Games</entry> <entry>Games or other frivolous programs</entry> </row>
<row> <entry>7</entry> <entry>Macro packages</entry> <entry>Such as <command>man</command> macros</entry> </row>
<row> <entry>8</entry> <entry>System administration</entry> <entry>Programs typically only run by root</entry> </row>
<row> <entry>9</entry> <entry>Kernel routines</entry> <entry>Non-standard calls and internals</entry> </row>
</tbody>
</tgroup>
</informaltable>
<para>
So <systemitem role="package">gentoo</systemitem>'s man page should be called
<filename>gentoo.1</filename>.  If there was no <filename>gentoo.1</filename>
man page in the original source, you should create it by renaming the
<filename>manpage.1.ex</filename> template to <filename>gentoo.1</filename> and
editing it using information from the example and from the upstream docs.
</para>
<para>
You can use the <command>help2man</command> command to generate a man page out
of the <literal>--help</literal> and <literal>--version</literal> output of each
program, too.  <footnote><para> Note that <command>help2man</command>'s
placeholder man page will claim that more detailed documentation is
available in the info system. If the command is missing an
<command>info</command> page, you
should manually edit the man page created by the
<command>help2man</command> command.  </para> </footnote>
</para>
</section>
<section id="manpagesgml"><title><filename>manpage.sgml.ex</filename></title>
<para>
If on the other hand you prefer writing SGML instead of
<command>nroff</command>, you can use the <filename>manpage.sgml.ex</filename>
template.  If you do this, you have to:
</para>
<itemizedlist>
<listitem>
<para>
rename the file to something like <filename>gentoo.sgml</filename>.
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
install the <systemitem role="package">docbook-to-man</systemitem> package
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
add <literal>docbook-to-man</literal> to the <literal>Build-Depends</literal>
line in the <filename>control</filename> file
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
add an <literal>override_dh_auto_build</literal> target to your
<filename>rules</filename> file:
</para>
<screen>
override_dh_auto_build:
        docbook-to-man debian/gentoo.sgml &gt; debian/gentoo.1
        dh_auto_build
</screen>
</listitem>
</itemizedlist>
</section>
<section id="manpagexml"><title><filename>manpage.xml.ex</filename></title>
<para>
If you prefer XML over SGML, you can use the <literal>manpage.xml.ex</literal>
template.  If you do this, you have to:
</para>
<itemizedlist>
<listitem>
<para>
rename the source file to something like <literal>gentoo.1.xml</literal>
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
install the <systemitem role="package">docbook-xsl</systemitem> package and an
XSLT processor like <systemitem role="package">xsltproc</systemitem>
(recommended)
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
add the <literal>docbook-xsl</literal>, <literal>docbook-xml</literal>, and
<literal>xsltproc</literal> packages to the <literal>Build-Depends</literal>
line in the <literal>control</literal> file
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
add an <literal>override_dh_auto_build</literal> target to your
<filename>rules</filename> file:
</para>
<screen>
override_dh_auto_build:
        xsltproc --nonet \
         --param make.year.ranges 1 \
         --param make.single.year.ranges 1 \
         --param man.charmap.use.subset 0 \
         -o debian/ \
http://docbook.sourceforge.net/release/xsl/current/manpages/docbook.xsl\
        debian/gentoo.1.xml
        dh_auto_build
</screen>
</listitem>
</itemizedlist>
</section>
</section>
<section id="manpages"><title><filename><replaceable>package</replaceable>.manpages</filename></title>
<para>
If your package has manual pages, you should install them using <citerefentry>
<refentrytitle>dh_installman</refentrytitle> <manvolnum>1</manvolnum>
</citerefentry> by listing them in a
<filename><replaceable>package</replaceable>.manpages</filename> file.
</para>
<para>
To install <filename>docs/gentoo.1</filename> as a manpage for the <systemitem role="package">gentoo</systemitem> package, create a
<filename>gentoo.manpages</filename> file as follows.
</para>
<screen>
docs/gentoo.1
</screen>
</section>
<section id="menu"><title><filename>menu</filename></title>
<para>
X Window System users usually have a window manager with a menu that can be
customized to launch programs.  If they have installed the Debian <systemitem role="package">menu</systemitem> package, a set of menus for every program on
the system will be created for them.
</para>
<para>
Here's the default <filename>menu.ex</filename> file that
<command>dh_make</command> created.
</para>
<screen>
?package(gentoo):needs=X11|text|vc|wm \
        section=Applications/see-menu-manual\
        title=gentoo command=/usr/bin/gentoo
</screen>
<para>
The first field after the colon character is <literal>needs</literal>, and it
specifies what kind of interface the program needs.  Change this to one of the
listed alternatives, e.g.  <literal>text</literal> or <literal>X11</literal>.
</para>
<para>
The next is the <literal>section</literal> that the menu and submenu entry
should appear in.
<footnote><para> The current list of sections is in
<ulink url="&menu-structure;">The Debian Menu sub-policy 2.1 "Preferred menu structure"</ulink>.
There was a major reorganization of menu structure for <literal>squeeze</literal>.
</para> </footnote>
</para>
<para>
The <literal>title</literal> field is the name of the program.  You can start
this one in uppercase if you like.  Just keep it short.
</para>
<para>
Finally, the <literal>command</literal> field is the command that runs the
program.
</para>
<para>
Let's change the file name to <filename>menu</filename> and change the menu
entry to this:
</para>
<screen>
?package(gentoo): needs=X11 \
        section=Applications/Tools \
        title=Gentoo command=gentoo
</screen>
<para>
You can also add other fields like <literal>longtitle</literal>,
<literal>icon</literal>, <literal>hints</literal> etc.  See <citerefentry>
<refentrytitle>dh_installmenu</refentrytitle> <manvolnum>1</manvolnum>
</citerefentry>, <citerefentry> <refentrytitle>menufile</refentrytitle>
<manvolnum>5</manvolnum> </citerefentry>, <citerefentry>
<refentrytitle>update-menus</refentrytitle> <manvolnum>1</manvolnum>
</citerefentry>, and
<ulink url="&policy-menu;">The Debian Menu sub-policy</ulink> for more
information.
</para>
</section>
<section id="news"><title><filename>NEWS</filename></title>
<para>
The <citerefentry> <refentrytitle>dh_installchangelogs</refentrytitle>
<manvolnum>1</manvolnum> </citerefentry> command installs this.
</para>
</section>
<section id="maintscripts"><title><filename>{pre,post}{inst,rm}</filename></title>
<para>
These <filename>postinst</filename>, <filename>preinst</filename>,
<filename>postrm</filename>, and <filename>prerm</filename> files
<footnote><para> Despite this use of the <command>bash</command>
shorthand expression <filename>{pre,post}{inst,rm}</filename> to indicate these
filenames, you should use pure POSIX syntax for these maintainer scripts for
compatibility with <command>dash</command> as the system shell.  </para> </footnote> are
called <emphasis>maintainer scripts</emphasis>.  They are scripts which are put
in the control area of the package and run by <command>dpkg</command> when your
package is installed, upgraded, or removed.
</para>
<para>
As a novice maintainer, you should avoid any manual editing of
maintainer scripts because they are problematic.  For more
information refer to the <ulink url="&policy-mantainerscripts;">Debian
Policy Manual, 6 "Package maintainer scripts and installation
procedure"</ulink>, and take a look at the example files provided by
<command>dh_make</command>.
</para>
<para>
If you did not listen to me and have created custom maintainer
scripts for a package, you should make sure to test them not only
for <emphasis role="strong">install</emphasis> and
<emphasis role="strong">upgrade</emphasis> but also for
<emphasis role="strong">remove</emphasis> and
<emphasis role="strong">purge</emphasis>.
</para>
<para>
Upgrades to the new version should be silent and non-intrusive (existing users
should not notice the upgrade except by discovering that old bugs have been
fixed and perhaps that there are new features).
</para>
<para>
When the upgrade is necessarily intrusive (eg., config files scattered through
various home directories with totally different structure), you may
consider as the last resort switching the package to a safe fallback state
(e.g., disabling a service) and providing the proper documentation
required by policy (<filename>README.Debian</filename> and
<filename>NEWS.Debian</filename>).  Don't bother the user with
<command>debconf</command> notes invoked from these maintainer scripts
for upgrades.
</para>
<para>
The <systemitem role="package">ucf</systemitem> package provides a
<emphasis>conffile-like</emphasis> handling infrastructure to preserve user
changes for files that may not be labeled as <emphasis>conffiles</emphasis> such
as those managed by the maintainer scripts.  This should
minimize issues associated with them.
</para>
<para>
These maintainer scripts are among the Debian enhancements that
explain <emphasis role="strong">why people choose Debian</emphasis>.  You must
be very careful not to turn them into a source of annoyance.
</para>
</section>
<section id="symbols"><title><filename><replaceable>package</replaceable>.symbols</filename></title>
<para>
Packaging of library is not easy for a novice maintainer and should be avoided.  Having said it, if your package has libraries, you should have <filename>debian/<replaceable>package</replaceable>.symbols</filename> files. See <xref linkend="librarysymbols"/>.
</para>
</section>
<section id="todo"><title><filename>TODO</filename></title>
<para>
The <citerefentry> <refentrytitle>dh_installdocs</refentrytitle>
<manvolnum>1</manvolnum> </citerefentry> command installs this.
</para>
</section>
<section id="watch"><title><filename>watch</filename></title>
<para>
The <filename>watch</filename> file format is documented in the <citerefentry>
<refentrytitle>uscan</refentrytitle> <manvolnum>1</manvolnum> </citerefentry>
manpage.  The <filename>watch</filename> file configures the
<command>uscan</command> program (in the <systemitem role="package">devscripts</systemitem> package) to watch the site where you
originally got the source from.  This is also used by the
<ulink url="&dehs;">Debian External Health Status (DEHS)</ulink> service.
</para>
<para>
Here are its contents:
</para>
<screen>
# watch control file for uscan
version=3
&sf-net;/gentoo/gentoo-(.+)\.tar\.gz debian uupdate
</screen>
<para>
Normally with a <filename>watch</filename> file, the URL at
<literal>&sf-net;/gentoo</literal> is downloaded and searched for links of
the form <literal>&lt;a href=...&gt;</literal>.  The basename (just the part
after the final <literal>/</literal>) of each linked URL is compared against
the Perl regular expression pattern (see <citerefentry> <refentrytitle>perlre</refentrytitle>
<manvolnum>1</manvolnum> </citerefentry>)
<literal>gentoo-(.+)\.tar\.gz</literal>.  Out of the files that match, the one with
the greatest version number is downloaded and the <command>uupdate</command>
program is run to create an updated source tree.
</para>
<para>
Although this is true for other sites, the SourceForge download service at
<ulink url="&sf-net;"/> is an exception.  When the
<filename>watch</filename> file has an URL matching the Perl regexp
<literal>^http://sf\.net/</literal>, the <command>uscan</command> program
replaces it with <literal>&qa-do;watch/sf.php/</literal> and
then applies this rule.  The URL redirector service at <ulink url="&qa-do;"/> is designed to offer
a stable redirect service to the desired file for any
<filename>watch</filename> pattern of the form
<literal>&sf-net;/<replaceable>project</replaceable>/<replaceable>tar-name</replaceable>-(.+)\.tar\.gz</literal>.
This solves issues related to periodically changing SourceForge URLs.
</para>
</section>
<section id="sourcef"><title><filename>source/format</filename></title>
<para>
In the <filename>debian/source/format</filename> file, there should be a single
line indicating the desired format for the source package (check <citerefentry>
<refentrytitle>dpkg-source</refentrytitle> <manvolnum>1</manvolnum>
</citerefentry> for an exhaustive list).  After <literal>squeeze</literal>, it
should say either:
</para>
<itemizedlist>
<listitem>
<para>
<literal>3.0 (native)</literal> for Debian native packages or
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
<literal>3.0 (quilt)</literal> for everything else.
</para>
</listitem>
</itemizedlist>
<para>
The newer <literal>3.0 (quilt)</literal> source format records modifications in
a <command>quilt</command> patch series within
<filename>debian/patches</filename>.  Those changes are then automatically
applied during extraction of the source package.  <footnote><para> See
<ulink url="&debsrc3;">DebSrc3.0</ulink> for a summary on the switch to the new <literal>3.0
(quilt)</literal> and <literal>3.0 (native)</literal> source formats.  </para>
</footnote> The Debian modifications are simply stored in a
<filename>debian.tar.gz</filename> archive containing all files under the
<filename>debian</filename> directory.  This new format supports inclusion of
binary files such as PNG icons by the package maintainer without requiring
tricks.  <footnote><para>Actually, this new format also supports multiple
upstream tarballs and more compression methods.  These are beyond the scope of
this document.</para> </footnote>
</para>
<para>
When <command>dpkg-source</command> extracts a source package in <literal>3.0
(quilt)</literal> source format, it automatically applies all patches listed in
<filename>debian/patches/series</filename>.  You can avoid applying patches at
the end of the extraction with the <literal>--skip-patches</literal> option.
</para>
</section>
<section id="sourcel"><title><filename>source/local-options</filename></title>
<para>
When you want to manage Debian packaging activities under a VCS, you typically
create one branch (e.g.  <literal>upstream</literal>) tracking the upstream
source and another branch (e.g.  typically <literal>master</literal> for Git)
tracking the Debian package.  For the latter, you usually want to have
unpatched upstream source with your <filename>debian/*</filename> files for the
Debian packaging to ease merging of the new upstream source.
</para>
<para>
After you build a package, the source is normally left patched.  You need to
unpatch it manually by running <literal>dquilt pop -a</literal> before
committing to the <literal>master</literal> branch.  You can automate this by
adding the optional <filename>debian/source/local-options</filename> file
containing <literal>unapply-patches</literal>.  This file is not included in
the generated source package and changes the local build behavior only.  This
file may contain <literal>abort-on-upstream-changes</literal>, too (see
<citerefentry> <refentrytitle>dpkg-source</refentrytitle>
<manvolnum>1</manvolnum> </citerefentry>).
</para>
<screen>
unapply-patches
abort-on-upstream-changes
</screen>
</section>
<section id="sourceopt"><title><filename>source/options</filename></title>
<para>
The autogenerated files in the source tree can be quite annoying for packaging
since they generate meaningless large patch files.  There are custom modules
such as <command>dh_autoreconf</command> to ease this problem as described in 
<xref linkend="customrules"/>.
</para>
<para>
You can provide a Perl regular expression to the
<literal>--extend-diff-ignore</literal> option argument of <citerefentry>
<refentrytitle>dpkg-source</refentrytitle><manvolnum>1</manvolnum>
</citerefentry> to ignore changes made to the autogenerated files while
creating the source package.
</para>
<para>
As a general solution to address this problem of the autogenerated files,
you can store such a <command>dpkg-source</command> option argument in the
<filename>source/options</filename> file of the source package.  The following
will skip creating patch files for <filename>config.sub</filename>,
<filename>config.guess</filename>, and <filename>Makefile</filename>.
</para>
<screen>
extend-diff-ignore = "(^|/)(config\.sub|config\.guess|Makefile)$"
</screen>
</section>
<section id="patches"><title><filename>patches/*</filename></title>
<para>
The old <literal>1.0</literal> source format created a single large
<filename>diff.gz</filename> file containing package maintenance files in
<filename>debian</filename> and patch files for the source.  Such a package is a
bit cumbersome to inspect and understand for each source tree modification
later.  This is not so nice.
</para>
<para>
The newer <literal>3.0 (quilt)</literal> source format stores patches in
<filename>debian/patches/*</filename> files using the <command>quilt</command>
command.  These patches and other package data which are all contained under
the <filename>debian</filename> directory are packaged as the
<filename>debian.tar.gz</filename> file.  Since the
<command>dpkg-source</command> command can handle <command>quilt</command>
formatted patch data in the <literal>3.0 (quilt)</literal> source without the
<systemitem role="package">quilt</systemitem> package, it does not need a
<literal>Build-Depends</literal> on <systemitem role="package">quilt</systemitem>.
<footnote><para> Several methods of patch set maintenance have been proposed and are in use for Debian
packages.  The <command>quilt</command> system is the preferred maintenance
system in use.  Others include <command>dpatch</command>,
<command>dbs</command>, and <command>cdbs</command>.  Many of these keep such
patches as <filename>debian/patches/*</filename> files.  </para> </footnote>
</para>
<para>
The <command>quilt</command> command is explained in <citerefentry>
<refentrytitle>quilt</refentrytitle> <manvolnum>1</manvolnum> </citerefentry>.
It records modifications to the source as a stack of <literal>-p1</literal>
patch files in the <filename>debian/patches</filename> directory and the source
tree is untouched outside of the <filename>debian</filename> directory.  The
order of these patches is recorded in the
<filename>debian/patches/series</filename> file.  You can apply (=push),
un-apply (=pop), and refresh patches easily.  <footnote><para> If you are
asking a sponsor to upload your package, this kind of clear separation and
documentation of your changes is very important to expedite the package review
by your sponsor.  </para> </footnote>
</para>
<para>
For <xref linkend="modify"/>, we created three patches in
<filename>debian/patches</filename>.
</para>
<para>
Since Debian patches are located in <filename>debian/patches</filename>, please
make sure to set up the <command>dquilt</command> command properly as described
in <xref linkend="quiltrc"/>.
</para>
<para>
When anyone (including yourself) provides a patch
<filename><replaceable>foo</replaceable>.patch</filename> to the source later,
modifying a <literal>3.0 (quilt)</literal> source package is
quite simple:
</para>
<screen>
$ dpkg-source -x gentoo_0.9.12.dsc
$ cd gentoo-0.9.12
$ dquilt import ../<replaceable>foo</replaceable>.patch
$ dquilt push
$ dquilt refresh
$ dquilt header -e
... describe patch
</screen>
<para>
The patches stored in the newer <literal>3.0 (quilt)</literal> source format
must be <emphasis>fuzz</emphasis> free.  You can ensure this with <literal>dquilt
pop -a; while dquilt push; do dquilt refresh; done</literal>.
</para>
</section>
</chapter>
<chapter id="build"><title>Building the package</title>
<para>
We should now be ready to build the package.
</para>
<section id="completebuild"><title>Complete (re)build</title>
<para>
In order to perform a complete (re)build of a package properly, you
need to make sure you have installed
</para>
<itemizedlist>
<listitem>
<para>
the <systemitem role="package">build-essential</systemitem> package,
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
packages listed in the <literal>Build-Depends</literal> field (see <xref linkend="control"/>), and
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
packages listed in the <literal>Build-Depends-indep</literal> field (see <xref linkend="control"/>).
</para>
</listitem>
</itemizedlist>
<para>
Then you issue the following command in the source directory:
</para>
<screen>
$ dpkg-buildpackage
</screen>
<para>
This will do everything to make full binary and source packages for you.  It
will:
</para>
<itemizedlist>
<listitem>
<para>
clean the source tree (<literal>debian/rules clean</literal>)
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
build the source package (<literal>dpkg-source -b</literal>)
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
build the program (<literal>debian/rules build</literal>)
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
build binary packages (<literal>fakeroot debian/rules binary</literal>)
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
sign the source <filename>.dsc</filename> file, using <command>gpg</command>
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
create and sign the upload <filename>.changes</filename> file, using
<command>dpkg-genchanges</command> and <command>gpg</command>
</para>
</listitem>
</itemizedlist>
<para>
The only input that will be required of you is your GPG secret pass phrase,
twice.
<footnote><para>
This GPG key must be signed by a Debian developer to get connected to the web
of trust and must be registered to <ulink url="&keyring;">the Debian
keyring</ulink>.  This enables your uploaded packages to be accepted to the
Debian archives.  See 
<ulink url="&keycreate;">Creating a new GPG key</ulink> and
<ulink url="&keysigning; ">Debian Wiki on Keysigning</ulink>.
</para></footnote>
If you are building Debian packages only for your own local use, you can skip
promptings for the GPG signatures on the <filename>.dsc</filename> file and the
<filename>.changes</filename> file like this:
</para>
<screen>
$ dpkg-buildpackage -us -uc
</screen>
<para>
For a non-native Debian package, e.g.,
<systemitem role="package">gentoo</systemitem>, you will see the following
files in the parent directory (<filename>~/gentoo</filename>) after building
packages:
</para>
<itemizedlist>
<listitem>
<para>
<filename>gentoo_0.9.12.orig.tar.gz</filename>
</para>
<para>
This is the original upstream source code tarball, merely renamed to the above so that
it adheres to the Debian standard.  Note that this was created initially by the
<literal>dh_make -f ../gentoo-0.9.12.tar.gz</literal>.
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
<filename>gentoo_0.9.12-1.dsc</filename>
</para>
<para>
This is a summary of the contents of the source code.  The file is generated
from your <filename>control</filename> file, and is used when unpacking the
source with <citerefentry> <refentrytitle>dpkg-source</refentrytitle>
<manvolnum>1</manvolnum> </citerefentry>.  This file is GPG signed, so that
people can be sure that it's really yours.
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
<filename>gentoo_0.9.12-1.debian.tar.gz</filename>
</para>
<para>
This compressed tarball contains your <filename>debian</filename> directory
contents.  Each and every addition you made to the original source code is
stored as a <command>quilt</command> patch in
<filename>debian/patches</filename>.
</para>
<para>
If someone else wants to re-create your package from scratch, they can easily
do so using the above three files.  The extraction procedure is trivial: just
copy the three files somewhere else and run <literal>dpkg-source -x
gentoo_0.9.12-1.dsc</literal>.  <footnote><para> You can avoid applying
<command>quilt</command> patches in the <literal>3.0 (quilt)</literal> source
format at the end of the extraction with the <literal>--skip-patches</literal>
option.  Alternatively, you can run <literal>dquilt pop -a</literal> after
normal operation.  </para> </footnote>
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
<filename>gentoo_0.9.12-1_i386.deb</filename>
</para>
<para>
This is your completed binary package.  You can use <command>dpkg</command> to
install and remove this just like any other package.
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
<filename>gentoo_0.9.12-1_i386.changes</filename>
</para>
<para>
This file describes all the changes made in the current package revision;
it is used by the Debian FTP archive maintenance programs to install the binary
and source packages.  It is partly generated from the
<filename>changelog</filename> file and the <filename>.dsc</filename> file.
This file is GPG signed, so that people can be sure that it's really yours.
</para>
<para>
As you keep working on the package, its behavior will change and new features will
be added.  People downloading your package can look at this file and quickly
see what has changed.  Debian archive maintenance programs will also post the
contents of this file to the <ulink url="&debian-devel-changes-ldo;">debian-devel-changes@lists.debian.org</ulink>
mailing list.
</para>
</listitem>
</itemizedlist>
<para>
The long strings of numbers in the <filename>.dsc</filename> and
<filename>.changes</filename> files are SHA1/SHA256 checksums for the files
mentioned.  Anyone downloading your files can test them with <citerefentry>
<refentrytitle>sha1sum</refentrytitle> <manvolnum>1</manvolnum>
</citerefentry> or <citerefentry> <refentrytitle>sha256sum</refentrytitle>
<manvolnum>1</manvolnum> </citerefentry> and if the numbers don't match,
they'll know the file is corrupt or has been tampered with.
</para>
<para>
For a native Debian package, e.g.,
<systemitem role="package">mypackage</systemitem>, you will see the following
files in the parent directory after building packages:
</para>
<itemizedlist>
<listitem>
<para>
<filename>mypackage_1.0.tar.gz</filename>
</para>
<para>
This is the source code tarball created from the
<filename>mypackage-1.0</filename> directory by the
<command>dpkg-source</command> command.  (Its suffix is not <filename>orig.tar.gz</filename>.)
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
<filename>mypackage_1.0.dsc</filename>
</para>
<para>
This is a summary of the contents of the source code as in the non-native
Debian package. (There is no Debian revision.)
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
<filename>mypackage_1.0_i386.deb</filename>
</para>
<para>
This is your completed binary package as in the non-native Debian package.
(There is no Debian revision.)
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
<filename>mypackage_1.0_i386.changes</filename>
</para>
<para>
This file describes all the changes made in the current package version as in
the non-native Debian package. (There is no Debian revision.)
</para>
</listitem>
</itemizedlist>
</section>
<section id="autobuilder"><title>Autobuilder</title>
<para>
Debian supports many <ulink url="&ports;">ports</ulink>
with the <ulink url="&buildd;">autobuilder
network</ulink> running <command>buildd</command> daemons on computers
of many different architectures.  Although you do not need to do this yourself, you
should be aware of what will happen to your packages.  Let's look into roughly
how they rebuild your packages for multiple architectures.
<footnote><para> The actual autobuilder system involves much more complicated
schemes than the one documented here.  Such details are beyond the scope of
this document.  </para> </footnote>
</para>
<para>
For <literal>Architecture: any</literal> packages, the autobuilder system
performs a rebuild.  It ensures the installation of
</para>
<itemizedlist>
<listitem>
<para>
the <systemitem role="package">build-essential</systemitem> package, and
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
packages listed in the <literal>Build-Depends</literal> field (see <xref linkend="control"/>).
</para>
</listitem>
</itemizedlist>
<para>
Then it issues the following command in the source directory:
</para>
<screen>
$ dpkg-buildpackage -B
</screen>
<para>
This will do everything to make architecture dependent binary packages on
another architecture.  It will:
</para>
<itemizedlist>
<listitem>
<para>
clean the source tree (<literal>debian/rules clean</literal>)
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
build the program (<literal>debian/rules build</literal>)
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
build architecture dependent binary packages (<literal>fakeroot debian/rules
binary-arch</literal>)
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
sign the source <filename>.dsc</filename> file, using <command>gpg</command>
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
create and sign the upload <filename>.changes</filename> file, using
<command>dpkg-genchanges</command> and <command>gpg</command>
</para>
</listitem>
</itemizedlist>
<para>
This is why you see your package for other architectures.
</para>
<para>
Although packages listed in the <literal>Build-Depends-Indep</literal> field
are required to be installed for our normal packaging work (see
<xref linkend="completebuild"/>), they are not required to be installed for the
autobuilder system since it builds only architecture dependent binary packages.
<footnote><para> Unlike under the <systemitem role="package">pbuilder</systemitem> package, the <command>chroot</command>
environment under the <systemitem role="package">sbuild</systemitem> package
used by the autobuilder system does not enforce the use of a minimal
system and may have many leftover packages installed.  </para>
</footnote> This distinction between normal packaging and autobuilding
procedures is what dictates whether you should record such required
packages in the <literal>Build-Depends</literal> or
<literal>Build-Depends-Indep</literal> fields of the
<filename>debian/control</filename> file (see <xref linkend="control"/>).
</para>
</section>
<section id="debuild"><title><command>debuild</command> command</title>
<para>
You can automate the <command>dpkg-buildpackage</command> command's
package build process further with the
<command>debuild</command> command.  See <citerefentry>
<refentrytitle>debuild</refentrytitle> <manvolnum>1</manvolnum>
</citerefentry>.
</para>
<para>
Customization of the <command>debuild</command> command can be done through
<filename>/etc/devscripts.conf</filename> or
<filename>~/.devscripts</filename>.  I would suggest at least the following items:
</para>
<screen>
DEBSIGN_KEYID=Your_GPG_keyID
DEBUILD_LINTIAN_OPTS=-i -I --show-overrides
</screen>
<para>
With these, packages are signed by your specified GPG key ID (good for
sponsoring packages) and checked in detail by the <command>lintian</command> command.
</para>
<para>
Cleaning the source and rebuilding the package from your user account is as simple as:
</para>
<screen>
$ debuild
</screen>
<para>
Here, if you are building Debian packages only for your own local use, you can skip
promptings for the GPG signatures on the <filename>.dsc</filename> file and the
<filename>.changes</filename> file like this:
</para>
<screen>
$ debuild -us -uc
</screen>
<para>
You can clean the source tree as simply as:
</para>
<screen>
$ debuild clean
</screen>
</section>
<section id="pbuilder"><title><systemitem role="package">pbuilder</systemitem> package</title>
<para>
For a clean room (<command>chroot</command>) build environment to verify the
build dependencies, the <systemitem role="package">pbuilder</systemitem>
package is very useful.  <footnote><para> Since the <systemitem
role="package">pbuilder</systemitem> package is still evolving, you should
check the actual configuration situation by consulting the latest official
documentation.</para> </footnote> This ensures a clean build from the source
under the <literal>sid</literal> auto-builder for different architectures and
avoids a severity serious FTBFS (Fails To Build From Source) bug which is
always in the RC (release critical) category. 
<footnote><para>See <ulink url="&buildd-do;"/> for more on
Debian package auto-building.</para></footnote>
</para>
<para>
Let's customize the <systemitem role="package">pbuilder</systemitem> package as
follows:
</para>
<itemizedlist>
<listitem>
<para>
setting the <filename>/var/cache/pbuilder/result</filename> directory writable by
for your user account.
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
creating a directory, e.g.
<filename><replaceable>/var/cache/pbuilder/hooks</replaceable></filename>,
writable by the user, to place hook scripts in.
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
configuring <filename>~/.pbuilderrc</filename> or
<filename>/etc/pbuilderrc</filename> to include the followsing.
</para>
<screen>
AUTO_DEBSIGN=${AUTO_DEBSIGN:-yes}
HOOKDIR=<replaceable>/var/cache/pbuilder/hooks</replaceable>
</screen>
</listitem>
</itemizedlist>
<para>
This will allow you to sign generated packages with your secret GPG key in the
<filename>~/.gnupg/</filename> directory.
</para>
<para>
First let's initialize the local <systemitem role="package">pbuilder</systemitem> <command>chroot</command> system as
follows.
</para>
<screen>
$ sudo pbuilder create
</screen>
<para>
If you already have a completed source package, issue the following commands
in the directory where the
<filename><replaceable>foo</replaceable>.orig.tar.gz</filename>,
<filename><replaceable>foo</replaceable>.debian.tar.gz</filename>, and
<filename><replaceable>foo</replaceable>.dsc</filename> files exist to update
the local <systemitem role="package">pbuilder</systemitem>
<command>chroot</command> system and to build binary packages in it.
</para>
<screen>
$ sudo pbuilder --update
$ sudo pbuilder --build <replaceable>foo_version</replaceable>.dsc
</screen>
<para>
The newly built packages without the GPG signatures will be located in
<filename>/var/cache/pbuilder/result/</filename> with non-root ownership.
</para>
<para>
The GPG signatures on the <filename>.dsc</filename> file and the
<filename>.changes</filename> file can be generated as:
</para>
<screen>
$ cd /var/cache/pbuilder/result/
$ debsign <replaceable>foo_version</replaceable>.dsc
$ debsign <replaceable>foo_version_arch</replaceable>.changes
</screen>
<para>
If you have an updated source tree but have not generated the matching
source package, issue the following commands in the source directory where the
<filename>debian</filename> directory exists, instead.
</para>
<screen>
$ sudo pbuilder --update
$ pdebuild
</screen>
<para>
Here, if you are building Debian packages only for your local use, you can skip
promptings for the GPG signatures on the <filename>.dsc</filename> file and the
<filename>.changes</filename> file as:
</para>
<screen>
$ AUTO_DEBSIGN=no pdebuild
</screen>
<para>
You can log into its <command>chroot</command> environment with the
<literal>pbuilder --login --save-after-login</literal> command and configure it
as you wish.  This environment can be saved by leaving its shell prompt with
<literal>^D</literal> (Control-D).
</para>
<para>
The latest version of the <command>lintian</command> command can be executed in
the <literal>chroot</literal> environment using the hook script
<filename><replaceable>/var/cache/pbuilder/hooks</replaceable>/B90lintian</filename>
configured as follows.  <footnote><para> This assumes
<literal>HOOKDIR=/var/cache/pbuilder/hooks</literal>.  You can find many
examples of hook scripts in the
<filename>/usr/share/doc/pbuilder/examples</filename> directory.  </para>
</footnote>
</para>
<screen>
#!/bin/sh
set -e
install_packages() {
        apt-get -y --force-yes install "$@"
        }
install_packages lintian
echo "+++ lintian output +++"
su -c "lintian -i -I --show-overrides /tmp/buildd/*.changes" - pbuilder
# use this version if you don't want lintian to fail the build
#su -c "lintian -i -I --show-overrides /tmp/buildd/*.changes; :" - pbuilder
echo "+++ end of lintian output +++"
</screen>
<para>
You need to have access to the latest <literal>sid</literal> environment to
build packages properly for <literal>sid</literal>.  In practice,
<literal>sid</literal> may be experiencing issues which makes it undesirable
for you to migrate your whole system.  The <systemitem role="package">pbuilder</systemitem> package can help you to cope with this
kind of situation.
</para>
<para>
You may need to update your <literal>stable</literal> packages after their
release for <literal>stable-proposed-updates</literal>,
<literal>stable/updates</literal>, etc.  <footnote><para> There are some
restrictions for such updates of your <literal>stable</literal> package.
</para> </footnote> For such occasions, the fact you may be running a <literal>sid</literal>
system is not a good enough excuse for failing to update them promptly.  The <systemitem role="package">pbuilder</systemitem> package can help you to access
environments of almost any Debian derivative distribution of the same 
architecture.
</para>
<para>
See <ulink url="&pbuilder;"/>,
<citerefentry> <refentrytitle>pdebuild</refentrytitle> <manvolnum>1</manvolnum>
</citerefentry>, <citerefentry> <refentrytitle>pbuilderrc</refentrytitle>
<manvolnum>5</manvolnum> </citerefentry>, and <citerefentry>
<refentrytitle>pbuilder</refentrytitle> <manvolnum>8</manvolnum>
</citerefentry>.
</para>
</section>
<section id="git-buildpackage"><title><command>git-buildpackage</command> command and similars</title>
<para>
If your upstream uses a source code management system (VCS)
<footnote><para>See <ulink url="&debref-vcs;">Version control systems</ulink> for more.</para></footnote>
to maintain their code, you should consider using it as well.  This makes merging
and cherry-picking upstream patches much easier.  There are several specialized
wrapper script packages for Debian package building for each VCS.
</para>
<itemizedlist>
<listitem>
<para>
<systemitem role="package">git-buildpackage</systemitem>: a suite to help with
Debian packages in Git repositories.
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
<systemitem role="package">svn-buildpackage</systemitem>: helper programs to
maintain Debian packages with Subversion.
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
<systemitem role="package">cvs-buildpackage</systemitem>: a set of Debian
package scripts for CVS source trees.
</para>
</listitem>
</itemizedlist>
<para>
Use of <systemitem role="package">git-buildpackage</systemitem> is becoming quite popular for Debian Developers to manage Debian packages with the Git server on <ulink url="&debian-alioth;">alioth.debian.org</ulink>. <footnote><para><ulink url="&debian-alioth-wiki;">Debian wiki Alioth</ulink> documents how to use the <ulink url="&debian-alioth;">alioth.debian.org</ulink>  service.</para></footnote> This package offers many commands to <emphasis>automate</emphasis> packaging activities.
</para>
<itemizedlist>
<listitem> <para> <citerefentry> <refentrytitle>git-import-dsc</refentrytitle> <manvolnum>1</manvolnum> </citerefentry>: import previous Debian package to a Git repository.</para> </listitem>
<listitem> <para> <citerefentry> <refentrytitle>git-import-orig</refentrytitle> <manvolnum>1</manvolnum> </citerefentry>: import new upstream tar to a Git repository.</para> </listitem>
<listitem> <para> <citerefentry> <refentrytitle>git-dch</refentrytitle> <manvolnum>1</manvolnum> </citerefentry>: generate the Debian changelog from Git commit messages.</para> </listitem>
<listitem> <para> <citerefentry> <refentrytitle>git-buildpackage</refentrytitle> <manvolnum>1</manvolnum> </citerefentry>: build Debian packages from a Git repository.</para> </listitem>
<listitem> <para> <citerefentry> <refentrytitle>git-pbuilder</refentrytitle> <manvolnum>1</manvolnum> </citerefentry>: build Debian packages from a Git repository using <command>pbuilder</command>/<command>cowbuilder</command>.</para> </listitem>
</itemizedlist>
<para>
These commands use 3 branches to track packaging activity.
</para>
<itemizedlist>
<listitem> <para> <literal>main</literal> for Debian package source tree.</para> </listitem>
<listitem> <para> <literal>upstream</literal> for upstream source tree.</para> </listitem>
<listitem> <para> <literal>pristine-tar</literal> for upstream tarball generated by the <literal>--pristine-tar</literal> option.<footnote><para>The <literal>--pristine-tar</literal> option invokes the <command>pristine-tar</command> command which can regenerate an exact copy of a pristine upstream tarball using only a small binary delta file and the contents of the tarball, which are typically kept in an <literal>upstream</literal> branch in the VCS. </para></footnote> </para> </listitem>
</itemizedlist>
<para>
You can configure <systemitem role="package">git-buildpackage</systemitem> with <filename>~/.gbp.conf</filename>. See <citerefentry> <refentrytitle>gbp.conf</refentrytitle> <manvolnum>5</manvolnum> </citerefentry>.
<footnote><para> Here are some web resources available for advanced audiences.  </para>
<itemizedlist>
<listitem> <para> Building Debian Packages with git-buildpackage (<filename>&git-buildpackage-doc;</filename>)</para> </listitem>
<listitem> <para> <ulink url="&debian-packages-git;">debian packages in git</ulink> </para> </listitem>
<listitem> <para> <ulink url="&git-debian-packaging;">Using Git for Debian Packaging</ulink> </para> </listitem> 
<listitem> <para> <ulink url="&git-dpm;">git-dpm: Debian packages in Git manager</ulink> </para> </listitem>
<listitem> <para> <ulink url="&topgit;">Using TopGit to generate quilt series for Debian packaging</ulink> </para> </listitem>
</itemizedlist> 
</footnote>
</para>
</section>

<section id="quickrebuild"><title>Quick rebuild</title>
<para>
With a large package, you may not want to rebuild from scratch every time while
you're tuning details in <filename>debian/rules</filename>.  For testing purposes,
you can make a <filename>.deb</filename> file without rebuilding the upstream
sources like this<footnote><para> Environment variables which are normally
configured to proper values are not set by this method.  Never create real
packages to be uploaded using this <emphasis role="strong">quick</emphasis>
method.  </para> </footnote>:
</para>
<screen>
$ fakeroot debian/rules binary
</screen>
<para>
Or simply do the following to see if it builds or not:
</para>
<screen>
$ fakeroot debian/rules build
</screen>
<para>
Once you are finished with your tuning, remember to rebuild following the
proper procedure.  You may not be able to upload correctly if you try to upload
<filename>.deb</filename> files built this way.
</para>
</section>
</chapter>
<chapter id="checkit"><title>Checking the package for errors</title>
<para>
There are some techniques you should know for checking a package for errors
before uploading it to the public archives.
</para>
<para>
It's also a good idea to carry out testing on a machine other than your own.  You must watch
closely for any warnings or errors for all the tests described here.
</para>
<section id="inadvent"><title>Suspicious changes</title>
<para>
If you find a new autogenerated patch file such as
<filename>debian-changes-*</filename> in the
<filename>debian/patches</filename> directory after building your non-native
Debian package in <literal>3.0 (quilt)</literal> format, chances are you
changed some files by accident or the build script modified the upstream
source.  If it is your mistake, fix it.  If it is caused by the build script,
fix the root cause with <command>dh-autoreconf</command> as in 
<xref linkend="customrules"/> or work around it with
<filename>source/options</filename> as in <xref linkend="sourceopt"/>.
</para>
</section>
<section id="pinstall"><title>Verifying a package's installation</title>
<para>
You must test your package for whether it installs without problem.  The <citerefentry>
<refentrytitle>debi</refentrytitle> <manvolnum>1</manvolnum> </citerefentry>
command helps you to test installing all the generated binary packages.
</para>
<screen>
$ sudo debi gentoo_0.9.12-1_i386.changes
</screen>
<para>
To prevent installation problem on different systems, you must make
sure that there are no filenames conflicting with other existing packages,
using the
<filename>Contents-<replaceable>i386</replaceable></filename> file downloaded
from the Debian archive.
The <command>apt-file</command> command may be handy for this task.  If there
are collisions, please take action to avoid this real problem, whether by
renaming the file, moving a common file to a separate package that
multiple packages can depend on, using the alternatives mechanism (see
<citerefentry><refentrytitle>update-alternatives</refentrytitle>
<manvolnum>1</manvolnum></citerefentry>) in coordination with the
maintainers of other affected packages, or declaring a
<literal>Conflicts</literal> relationship in the
<filename>debian/control</filename> file.
</para>
</section>
<section id="pmaintscripts"><title>Verifying a package's maintainer scripts</title>
<para>
All maintainer scripts (that is,
<filename>preinst</filename>, <filename>prerm</filename>,
<filename>postinst</filename>, and <filename>postrm</filename> files) are
hard to write correctly unless they are auto-generated by the
<systemitem role="package">debhelper</systemitem> programs.  So do not use them if you are
a novice maintainer (see <xref linkend="maintscripts"/>).
</para>
<para>
If the package makes use of these non-trivial maintainer scripts, be sure to test not only for install but also for remove,
purge, and upgrade processes.  Many maintainer script bugs show up
when packages are removed or purged.  Use the <command>dpkg</command> command
as follows to test them.
</para>
<screen>
$ sudo dpkg -r gentoo
$ sudo dpkg -P gentoo
$ sudo dpkg -i gentoo_<replaceable>version</replaceable>-<replaceable>revision</replaceable>_<replaceable>i386</replaceable>.deb
</screen>
<para>
This should be done with sequences such as the following.
</para>
<itemizedlist>
<listitem>
<para>
install the previous version (if needed).
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
upgrade it from the previous version.
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
downgrade it back to the previous version (optional).
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
purge it.
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
install the new package.
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
remove it.
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
install it again.
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
purge it.
</para>
</listitem>
</itemizedlist>
<para>
If this is your first package, you should create dummy packages with different
versions to test your package in advance to prevent future problems.
</para>
<para>
Bear in mind that if your package has previously been released in Debian,
people will often be upgrading to your package from the version that was in the
last Debian release.  Remember to test upgrades from that version too.
</para>
<para>
Although downgrading is not officially supported, supporting it is a
friendly gesture.
</para>
</section>
<section id="lintians"><title>Using <systemitem role="package">lintian</systemitem></title>
<para>
Run <citerefentry> <refentrytitle>lintian</refentrytitle>
<manvolnum>1</manvolnum> </citerefentry> on your <filename>.changes</filename>
file.  The <command>lintian</command> command runs many test scripts to check
for many common packaging errors.  <footnote><para> You do not need to provide
the <command>lintian</command> option <literal>-i -I --show-overrides</literal>
if you customized <filename>/etc/devscripts.conf</filename> or
<filename>~/.devscripts</filename> as described in <xref linkend="debuild"/>.
</para> </footnote>
</para>
<screen>
$ lintian -i -I --show-overrides gentoo_0.9.12-1_i386.changes
</screen>
<para>
Of course, replace the filename with the name of the
<filename>.changes</filename> file generated for your package.  The output of
the <command>lintian</command> command uses the following flags.
</para>
<itemizedlist>
<listitem>
<para>
<literal>E:</literal> for error; a sure policy violation or packaging error.
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
<literal>W:</literal> for warning; a possible policy violation or packaging
error.
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
<literal>I:</literal> for info; information on certain aspects of packaging.
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
<literal>N:</literal> for note; a detailed message to help your debugging.
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
<literal>O:</literal> for overridden; a message overridden by the
<filename>lintian-overrides</filename> files but displayed by the
<literal>--show-overrides</literal> option.
</para>
</listitem>
</itemizedlist>
<para>
When you see warnings, tune the package to avoid them or verify that the warnings are
spurious.  If spurious, set up <filename>lintian-overrides</filename> files as
described in <xref linkend="lintian"/>.
</para>
<para>
Note that you can build the package with <command>dpkg-buildpackage</command>
and run <command>lintian</command> on it in one command, if you use <citerefentry>
<refentrytitle>debuild</refentrytitle> <manvolnum>1</manvolnum> </citerefentry>
or <citerefentry> <refentrytitle>pdebuild</refentrytitle>
<manvolnum>1</manvolnum> </citerefentry>.
</para>
</section>
<section id="debc"><title>The <command>debc</command> command</title>
<para>
You can list files in the binary Debian package with the <citerefentry>
<refentrytitle>debc</refentrytitle> <manvolnum>1</manvolnum> </citerefentry>
command.
</para>
<screen>
$ debc <replaceable>package</replaceable>.changes
</screen>
</section>
<section id="debdiff"><title>The <command>debdiff</command> command</title>
<para>
You can compare file contents in two source Debian packages with the
<citerefentry> <refentrytitle>debdiff</refentrytitle> <manvolnum>1</manvolnum>
</citerefentry> command.
</para>
<screen>
$ debdiff <replaceable>old-package</replaceable>.dsc <replaceable>new-package</replaceable>.dsc
</screen>
<para>
You can also compare file lists in two sets of binary Debian packages with the
<citerefentry> <refentrytitle>debdiff</refentrytitle> <manvolnum>1</manvolnum>
</citerefentry> command.
</para>
<screen>
$ debdiff <replaceable>old-package</replaceable>.changes <replaceable>new-package</replaceable>.changes
</screen>
<para>
These are useful to identify what has been changed in the source packages
and to check for inadvertent changes made when updating binary
packages, such as unintentionally misplacing or removing files.
</para>
</section>
<section id="interdiff"><title>The <command>interdiff</command> command</title>
<para>
You can compare two <filename>diff.gz</filename> files with the <citerefentry>
<refentrytitle>interdiff</refentrytitle> <manvolnum>1</manvolnum>
</citerefentry> command.  This is useful for verifying that no inadvertent
changes were made to the source by the maintainer when updating packages in the
old <literal>1.0</literal> source format.
</para>
<screen>
$ interdiff -z <replaceable>old-package</replaceable>.diff.gz <replaceable>new-package</replaceable>.diff.gz
</screen>
<para>
The new <literal>3.0</literal> source format stores changes in multiple patch
files as described in <xref linkend="patches"/>.  You can trace changes of each
<filename>debian/patches/*</filename> file using <command>interdiff</command>, too.
</para>
</section>
<section id="mc"><title>The <command>mc</command> command</title>
<para>
Many of these file inspection operations can be made into an intuitive process
by using a file manager like <citerefentry> <refentrytitle>mc</refentrytitle>
<manvolnum>1</manvolnum> </citerefentry> which will let you browse not only the
contents of <filename>*.deb</filename> package files but also
<filename>*.udeb</filename>, <filename>*.debian.tar.gz</filename>,
<filename>*.diff.gz</filename>, and <filename>*.orig.tar.gz</filename> files.
</para>
<para>
Be on the lookout for extra unneeded files or zero length files, both in the
binary and source package.  Often cruft doesn't get cleaned up properly; adjust
your <filename>rules</filename> file to compensate for this.
</para>
</section>
</chapter>
<chapter id="upload"><title>Uploading the package</title>
<para>
Now that you have tested your new package thoroughly, you want to release it to
a public archive to share it.
</para>
<section id="upload-debian"><title>Uploading to the Debian archive</title>
<para>
Once you become an official developer,
<footnote><para>
See <xref linkend="socialdynamics"/>.
</para></footnote>
you can upload the package to the Debian archive.
<footnote><para>
There are publicly accessible archives such as <ulink url="&mentors-dn;"/>
which work almost the same way as the Debian archive and provide an upload area for
non-DDs.  You can set up an equivalent archive by yourself using the tools
listed at <ulink url="&deb-archive;"/>.  So this section is useful for
non-DDs, too.
</para></footnote>
You can do this manually, but it's easier to use the existing
automated tools, like <citerefentry> <refentrytitle>dupload</refentrytitle>
<manvolnum>1</manvolnum> </citerefentry> or <citerefentry>
<refentrytitle>dput</refentrytitle> <manvolnum>1</manvolnum> </citerefentry>.
We'll describe how it's done with <command>dupload</command>.  <footnote><para>
The <systemitem role="package">dput</systemitem> package seems to come with
more features and to be becoming more popular than the <systemitem role="package">dupload</systemitem> package.  It uses the
file <filename>/etc/dput</filename> for its global configuration and the
file <filename>~/.dput.cf</filename> for per-user configuration.  It supports
Ubuntu-related services out-of-the-box, too.  </para> </footnote>
</para>
<para>
First you have to set up <command>dupload</command>'s config file.  You can
either edit the system-wide <filename>/etc/dupload.conf</filename> file, or
have your own <filename>~/.dupload.conf</filename> file override the few things
you want to change.
</para>
<para>
You can read the <citerefentry> <refentrytitle>dupload.conf</refentrytitle>
<manvolnum>5</manvolnum> </citerefentry> manual page to understand what each of
these options means.
</para>
<para>
The <literal>$default_host</literal> option determines which of the upload
queues will be used by default.  <literal>anonymous-ftp-master</literal> is the
primary one, but it's possible that you will want to use another one.
<footnote><para>See <ulink url="&devref-upload;">Debian Developer's Reference 5.6. "Uploading a package"</ulink>.</para></footnote>
</para>
<para>
While connected to the Internet, you can upload your package as follows:
</para>
<screen>
$ dupload gentoo_0.9.12-1_i386.changes
</screen>
<para>
<command>dupload</command> checks that the SHA1/SHA256 file checksums
match those listed in the <filename>.changes</filename> file.  If they do not
match, it will warn you to rebuild it as described in <xref linkend="completebuild"/> so it can be properly uploaded.
</para>
<!--
No more use of ftp-master nor faster queue.  It is not so
useful these days.  If you upload to ftp-master, <command>dupload</command>
will ask for your password on Debian machines, and then upload the packages.
-->
<para>
If you encounter an upload problem at <ulink url="&uploadqueue;"/>, you can fix this
by manually uploading a GPG-signed <filename>*.commands</filename> file to there
with <command>ftp</command>.  <footnote><para> See <ulink url="&uploadqueue-readme;"/>.  Alternatively, you can
use the <command>dcut</command> command from the <systemitem
role="package">dput</systemitem> package.  </para> </footnote> For example, using
<filename>hello.commands</filename>:
</para>
<screen>
-----BEGIN PGP SIGNED MESSAGE-----
Hash: SHA1
Uploader: Foo Bar &lt;Foo.Bar@example.org&gt;
Commands: 
 rm hello_1.0-1_i386.deb
 mv hello_1.0-1.dsx hello_1.0-1.dsc
-----BEGIN PGP SIGNATURE-----
Version: GnuPG v1.4.10 (GNU/Linux)

[...]
-----END PGP SIGNATURE-----
</screen>
</section>
<section id="option-sa"><title>Including <filename>orig.tar.gz</filename> for upload</title>
<para>
When you first upload the package to the archive, you need to include the
original <filename>orig.tar.gz</filename> source, too.  If the Debian revision
number of this package is neither <literal>1</literal> nor
<literal>0</literal>, you must provide the <command>dpkg-buildpackage</command>
option <literal>-sa</literal>.
</para>
<para>
For the <command>dpkg-buildpackage</command> command:
</para>
<screen>
$ dpkg-buildpackage -sa
</screen>
<para>
For the <command>debuild</command> command:
</para>
<screen>
$ debuild -sa
</screen>
<para>
For the <command>pdebuild</command> command:
</para>
<screen>
$ pdebuild --debbuildopts -sa
</screen>
<para>
On the other hand, the <literal>-sd</literal> option will force the exclusion
of the original <filename>orig.tar.gz</filename> source.
</para>
</section>
<section id="skipped-uploads"><title>Skipped uploads</title>
<para>
If you created multiple entries in <filename>debian/changelog</filename> by
skipping uploads, you must create a proper <filename>*_.changes</filename> file
which includes all changes from the last upload.
This can be done by specifying the <command>dpkg-buildpackage</command> option
<literal>-v</literal> with the version, e.g.,
<literal><replaceable>1.2</replaceable></literal>.
</para>
<para>
For the <command>dpkg-buildpackage</command> command:
</para>
<screen>
$ dpkg-buildpackage -v<replaceable>1.2</replaceable>
</screen>
<para>
For the <command>debuild</command> command:
</para>
<screen>
$ debuild -v<replaceable>1.2</replaceable>
</screen>
<para>
For the <command>pdebuild</command> command:
</para>
<screen>
$ pdebuild --debbuildopts "-v<replaceable>1.2</replaceable>"
</screen>
</section>
</chapter>
<chapter id="update"><title>Updating the package</title>
<para>
After you release a package, you will soon need to update it.
</para>
<section id="newrevision"><title>New Debian revision</title>
<para>
Let's say that a bug report was filed against your package as
<literal>#654321</literal>, and it describes a problem that you can solve.
Here's what you need to do to create a new Debian revision of the package.
</para>
<itemizedlist>
<listitem>
<para>
If this is to be recorded as a new patch, do the following.
</para>
<itemizedlist>
<listitem>
<para>
<literal>dquilt new <replaceable>bugname.patch</replaceable></literal> to set
the patch name;
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
<literal>dquilt add <replaceable>buggy-file</replaceable></literal> to declare
the file to be modified;
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
Correct the problem in the package source for the upstream bug;
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
<literal>dquilt refresh</literal> to record it to
<filename><replaceable>bugname.patch</replaceable></filename>;
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
<literal>dquilt header -e</literal> to add its description;
</para>
</listitem>
</itemizedlist>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
If this is to update an existing patch, do the following.
</para>
<itemizedlist>
<listitem>
<para>
<literal>dquilt pop <replaceable>foo.patch</replaceable></literal> to recall
the existing <filename><replaceable>foo.patch</replaceable></filename>;
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
Correct the problem in the old
<filename><replaceable>foo.patch</replaceable></filename>;
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
<literal>dquilt refresh</literal> to update
<filename><replaceable>foo.patch</replaceable></filename>;
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
<literal>dquilt header -e</literal> to update its description;
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
<literal>while dquilt push; do dquilt refresh; done</literal> to apply all
patches while removing <emphasis>fuzz</emphasis>;
</para>
</listitem>
</itemizedlist>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
Add a new revision at the top of the Debian <filename>changelog</filename>
file, for example with <literal>dch -i</literal>, or explicitly with
<literal>dch -v
<replaceable>version</replaceable>-<replaceable>revision</replaceable></literal>
and then insert the comments using your preferred editor.  <footnote><para>To
get the date in the required format, use <literal>LANG=C date -R</literal>.
</para> </footnote>
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
Include a short description of the bug and the solution in the changelog entry,
followed by <literal>Closes: #654321</literal>.  That way, the bug report will
be <emphasis>automagically</emphasis> closed by the archive maintenance
software the moment your package gets accepted into the Debian archive.
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
Repeat what you did in the above to fix more bugs while updating the Debian
<filename>changelog</filename> file with <literal>dch</literal> as needed.
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
Repeat what you did in <xref linkend="completebuild"/> and <xref linkend="checkit"/>.
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
Once you are satisfied, you should change the distribution value in <filename>changelog</filename> from
<literal>UNRELEASED</literal> to the target distribution value
<literal>unstable</literal> (or even <literal>experimental</literal>).<footnote><para>If you
use the <literal>dch -r</literal> command to make this last change,  please
make sure to save the <filename>changelog</filename> file explicitly by the
editor.</para></footnote>
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
Upload the package as <xref linkend="upload"/>.  The difference is that
this time, the original source archive won't be included, as it hasn't been
changed and it already exists in the Debian archive.
</para>
</listitem>
</itemizedlist>
<para>
One tricky case can occur when you make a local package to experiment with
the packaging before uploading  the normal version to the official archive,
e.g.,
<literal><replaceable>1.0.1</replaceable>-<replaceable>1</replaceable></literal>.
For smoother upgrades, it is a good idea to create a
<filename>changelog</filename> entry with a version string as
<literal><replaceable>1.0.1</replaceable>-<replaceable>1~rc1</replaceable></literal>.
You may unclutter <filename>changelog</filename>
by consolidating such local change entries into a single entry for the official package.
See <xref linkend="namever"/> for the order of version strings.
</para>
<para>
</para>
</section>
<section id="inspectnewupstream"><title>Inspection of the new upstream release</title>
<para>
When preparing packages of a new upstream release for the Debian archive, you
must check the new upstream release, first.
</para>
<para>
Start by reading the upstream <filename>changelog</filename>,
<filename>NEWS</filename>, and whatever other documentation they may have
released with the new version.
</para>
<para>
You can then inspect changes between the old and new upstream sources as follows,
watching out for anything suspicious.
</para>
<screen>
$ diff -urN <replaceable>foo</replaceable>-<replaceable>oldversion</replaceable> <replaceable>foo</replaceable>-<replaceable>newversion</replaceable>
</screen>
<para>
Changes to some auto-generated files by Autotools such as
<filename>missing</filename>, <filename>aclocal.m4</filename>,
<filename>config.guess</filename>, <filename>config.h.in</filename>,
<filename>config.sub</filename>, <filename>configure</filename>,
<filename>depcomp</filename>, <filename>install-sh</filename>,
<filename>ltmain.sh</filename>, and <filename>Makefile.in</filename> may be
ignored.  You may delete them before running <command>diff</command> on the
source for inspection.
</para>
</section>
<section id="newupstream"><title>New upstream release</title>
<para>
If a package <systemitem role="package"><replaceable>foo</replaceable></systemitem> is properly packaged
in the newer <literal>3.0 (native)</literal> or <literal>3.0 (quilt)</literal>
formats, packaging a new upstream version is essentially moving the old
<filename>debian</filename> directory to the new source.  This can be done by
running <literal>tar xvzf
/<replaceable>path</replaceable>/<replaceable>to</replaceable>/<replaceable>foo</replaceable>_<replaceable>oldversion</replaceable>.debian.tar.gz</literal>
in the new extracted source.  <footnote><para> If a package <systemitem role="package"><replaceable>foo</replaceable></systemitem> is packaged in the
old <literal>1.0</literal> format, this can be done by running <literal>zcat
/<replaceable>path</replaceable>/<replaceable>to</replaceable>/<replaceable>foo</replaceable>_<replaceable>oldversion</replaceable>.diff.gz|patch
-p1</literal> in the new extracted source, instead.  </para> </footnote> Of
course, you need to do some obvious chores.
</para>
<itemizedlist>
<listitem>
<para>
Create a copy of the upstream source as the
<filename>foo_<replaceable>newversion</replaceable>.orig.tar.gz</filename> file.
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
Update the Debian <filename>changelog</filename> file with <literal>dch -v
<replaceable>newversion</replaceable>-<replaceable>1</replaceable></literal>.
</para>
<itemizedlist>
<listitem>
<para>
Add an entry with <literal>New upstream release</literal>.
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
Describe concisely the changes <emphasis>in the new upstream release</emphasis>
that fix reported bugs and close those bugs by adding <literal>Closes: #<replaceable>bug_number</replaceable></literal>.
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
Describe concisely the changes <emphasis>to the new upstream release</emphasis>
by the maintainer that fix reported bugs and close those bugs by adding <literal>Closes: #<replaceable>bug_number</replaceable></literal>.
</para>
</listitem>
</itemizedlist>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
<literal>while dquilt push; do dquilt refresh; done</literal> to apply all
patches while removing <emphasis>fuzz</emphasis>.
</para>
</listitem>
</itemizedlist>
<para>
If the patch/merge did not apply cleanly, inspect the situation (clues are left
in <filename>.rej</filename> files).
</para>
<itemizedlist>
<listitem>
<para>
If a patch you applied to the source was integrated into the upstream source,
</para>
<itemizedlist>
<listitem>
<para>
<literal>dquilt delete</literal> to remove it.
</para>
</listitem>
</itemizedlist>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
If a patch you applied to the source conflicted with new changes in the
upstream source,
</para>
<itemizedlist>
<listitem>
<para>
<literal>dquilt push -f</literal> to apply old patches while forcing rejects as
<filename><replaceable>baz</replaceable>.rej</filename>.
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
Edit the <filename><replaceable>baz</replaceable></filename> file manually to
bring about the intended effect of
<filename><replaceable>baz</replaceable>.rej</filename>.
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
<literal>dquilt refresh</literal> to update the patch.
</para>
</listitem>
</itemizedlist>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
Continue as usual with <literal>while dquilt push; do dquilt refresh; done</literal>.
</para>
</listitem>
</itemizedlist>
<para>
This process can be automated using the <citerefentry>
<refentrytitle>uupdate</refentrytitle> <manvolnum>1</manvolnum> </citerefentry>
command as follows:
</para>
<screen>
$ apt-get source <replaceable>foo</replaceable>
...
dpkg-source: info: extracting <replaceable>foo</replaceable> in <replaceable>foo</replaceable>-<replaceable>oldversion</replaceable>
dpkg-source: info: unpacking <replaceable>foo</replaceable>_<replaceable>oldversion</replaceable>.orig.tar.gz
dpkg-source: info: applying <replaceable>foo</replaceable>_<replaceable>oldversion</replaceable>-1.debian.tar.gz
$ ls -F
<replaceable>foo</replaceable>-<replaceable>oldversion</replaceable>/
<replaceable>foo</replaceable>_<replaceable>oldversion</replaceable>-1.debian.tar.gz
<replaceable>foo</replaceable>_<replaceable>oldversion</replaceable>-1.dsc
<replaceable>foo</replaceable>_<replaceable>oldversion</replaceable>.orig.tar.gz
$ wget http://example.org/<replaceable>foo</replaceable>/<replaceable>foo</replaceable>-<replaceable>newversion</replaceable>.tar.gz
$ cd <replaceable>foo</replaceable>-<replaceable>oldversion</replaceable>
$ uupdate -v <replaceable>newversion</replaceable> ../<replaceable>foo</replaceable>-<replaceable>newversion</replaceable>.tar.gz
$ cd ../<replaceable>foo</replaceable>-<replaceable>newversion</replaceable>
$ while dquilt push; do dquilt refresh; done
$ dch
... document changes made
</screen>
<para>
If you set up a <filename>debian/watch</filename> file as described in <xref linkend="watch"/>, you can skip the <command>wget</command> command.  You
simply run <citerefentry> <refentrytitle>uscan</refentrytitle>
<manvolnum>1</manvolnum> </citerefentry> in the
<filename><replaceable>foo</replaceable>-<replaceable>oldversion</replaceable></filename>
directory instead of the <command>uupdate</command> command.  This will
<emphasis>automagically</emphasis> look for the updated source, download it,
and run the <command>uupdate</command> command.  <footnote><para> If the
<command>uscan</command> command downloads the updated source but it does not
run the <command>uupdate</command> command, you should correct the
<filename>debian/watch</filename> file to have <literal>debian
uupdate</literal> at the end of the URL.  </para> </footnote>
</para>
<para>
You can release this updated source by repeating what you did in <xref linkend="completebuild"/>, <xref linkend="checkit"/>, and <xref linkend="upload"/>.
</para>
</section>

<section id="packagestyle"><title>Updating the packaging style</title>
<para>
Updating the package style is not a required activity for the update of a
package.  However, doing so lets you use the full capabilities of the modern
<systemitem role="package">debhelper</systemitem> system and the <literal>3.0</literal>
source format.  <footnote><para> If your sponsor or other
maintainers object to updating the existing packaging style, don't bother
arguing.  There are more important things to do.  </para>
</footnote>
</para>
<itemizedlist>
<listitem>
<para>
If you need to recreate deleted template files for any reason, you can run
<command>dh_make</command> again in the same Debian package source tree with
the <literal>--addmissing</literal> option.  Then edit them appropriately.
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
If the package has not been updated to use the <systemitem role="package">debhelper</systemitem> v7 <command>dh</command> syntax for the
<filename>debian/rules</filename> file, update it to use <command>dh</command>.
Update the <filename>debian/control</filename> file accordingly.
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
If you want to update the <filename>rules</filename> file created with the
<filename>Makefile</filename> inclusion mechanism of the Common Debian Build
System (<systemitem role="package">cdbs</systemitem>) to the
<command>dh</command> syntax, see the following to understand its
<literal>DEB_*</literal> configuration variables.
</para>
<itemizedlist>
<listitem><para>local copy of <filename>&cdbs-doc;</filename></para></listitem>
<listitem><para><ulink url="&cdbs-tutorial;">The Common Debian Build System (CDBS), FOSDEM 2009</ulink></para></listitem>
</itemizedlist>
<!-- 
<footnote><para> In the
<systemitem role="package">cdbs</systemitem> (0.4.74) package, there are some
negative descriptions of the <filename>rules</filename> file created by the
<command>dh_make</command> command for the non-<systemitem role="package">cdbs</systemitem> choices.  Do not worry about it.  It applies
only for <literal>lenny</literal> which created explicit targets with long lists
of <command>dh_*</command> commands.  </para> </footnote>
-->
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
If you have a <literal>1.0</literal> source package without the
<filename><replaceable>foo</replaceable>.diff.gz</filename> file, you can
update it to the newer <literal>3.0 (native)</literal> source format by
creating <filename>debian/source/format</filename> with <literal>3.0
(native)</literal>.  The rest of the <filename>debian/*</filename> files can just be
copied.
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
If you have a <literal>1.0</literal> source package with the
<filename><replaceable>foo</replaceable>.diff.gz</filename> file, you can
update it to the newer <literal>3.0 (quilt)</literal> source format by creating
<filename>debian/source/format</filename> with <literal>3.0 (quilt)</literal>.
The rest of the <filename>debian/*</filename> files can just be copied.  Import the
<filename>big.diff</filename> file generated by the command <literal>filterdiff -z -x
'*/debian/*' <replaceable>foo</replaceable>.diff.gz &gt; big.diff</literal>
to your <command>quilt</command> system, if needed.  <footnote><para>
You can split <filename>big.diff</filename> into many small incremental patches
using the <command>splitdiff</command> command.  </para> </footnote>
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
If it was packaged using another patch system such as <systemitem role="package">dpatch</systemitem>, <systemitem role="package">dbs</systemitem>, or <systemitem role="package">cdbs</systemitem> with <literal>-p0</literal>,
<literal>-p1</literal>, or <literal>-p2</literal>, convert it to the
<systemitem role="package">quilt</systemitem> command using
<filename>deb3</filename> at <ulink url="&deb3;"/>.
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
If it was packaged with the <command>dh</command> command with the
<literal>--with quilt</literal> option or with the
<command>dh_quilt_patch</command> and <command>dh_quilt_unpatch</command>
commands, remove these and make it use the newer <literal>3.0
(native)</literal> source format.
</para>
</listitem>
</itemizedlist>
<para>
You should check <ulink url="&dep;">DEP - Debian Enhancement Proposals</ulink> and adopt ACCEPTED proposals.
</para>
<para>
You need to do the other tasks described in <xref linkend="newupstream"/>, too.
</para>
</section>

<section id="utf8"><title>UTF-8 conversion</title>
<para>
If upstream documents are encoded in old encoding schemes, converting them to <ulink url="&utf8;">UTF-8</ulink> is a good idea.
</para>
<itemizedlist>
<listitem>
<para>
Use <citerefentry> <refentrytitle>iconv</refentrytitle> <manvolnum>1</manvolnum> </citerefentry> to convert encodings of plain text files.
</para>
<screen>
iconv -f latin1 -t utf8 <replaceable>foo_in.txt</replaceable> &gt; <replaceable>foo_out.txt</replaceable>
</screen>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
Use <citerefentry> <refentrytitle>w3m</refentrytitle> <manvolnum>1</manvolnum> </citerefentry> to convert from HTML files to UTF-8 plain text files.  When you do this, make sure to execute it under UTF-8 locale.
</para>
<screen>
LC_ALL=C.UTF-8 w3m -o display_charset=UTF-8 \
        -cols 70 -dump -no-graph -T text/html \
        &lt; <replaceable>foo_in.html</replaceable> &gt; <replaceable>foo_out.txt</replaceable>
</screen>
</listitem>
</itemizedlist>
</section>

<section id="reminders"><title>Reminders for updating packages</title>
<para>
Here are few reminders for updating packages.
</para>
<itemizedlist>
<listitem>
<para>
Preserve old <filename>changelog</filename> entries (sounds obvious, but there
have been cases of people typing <literal>dch</literal> when they should have typed
<literal>dch -i</literal>.)
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
Existing Debian changes need to be reevaluated; throw away stuff that upstream
has incorporated (in one form or another) and remember to keep stuff that
hasn't been incorporated by upstream, unless there is a compelling reason not
to.
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
If any changes were made to the build system (hopefully you'd know from
inspecting upstream changes) then update the <filename>debian/rules</filename>
and <filename>debian/control</filename> build dependencies if necessary.
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
Check the <ulink url="&bts;">Debian Bug Tracking
System (BTS)</ulink> to see if someone has provided patches to bugs that are
currently open.
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
Check the contents of the <filename>.changes</filename> file to make sure you
are uploading to the correct distribution, the proper bug closures are listed
in the <literal>Closes</literal> field, the <literal>Maintainer</literal> and
<literal>Changed-By</literal> fields match, the file is GPG-signed, etc.
</para>
</listitem>
</itemizedlist>
</section>
</chapter>

<appendix id="advanced"><title>Advanced packaging</title>
<!-- This is tough topic for me to get into details and track them in good shape. -->
<para>
Here are some hints and pointers for advanced packaging topics which you are most likely to deal with.
You are strongly advised to read all the references suggested here.
</para>
<section id="library"><title>Shared libraries</title>
<para>
Before packaging shared <ulink url="&library;">libraries</ulink>, you should read the following primary references in detail.
</para>
<itemizedlist>
<listitem>
<para>
<ulink url="&policy-sharedlibraries;">Debian Policy Manual, 8 "Shared libraries"</ulink>
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
<ulink url="&policy-fhs;">Debian Policy Manual, 9.1.1 "File System Structure"</ulink>
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
<ulink url="&policy-libraries;">Debian Policy Manual, 10.2 "Libraries"</ulink>
</para>
</listitem>
</itemizedlist>
<para>
Here are some oversimplified hints for you to get started.
</para>
<itemizedlist>
<listitem>
<para>
Shared libraries are <ulink url="&elf;">ELF</ulink> object files containing compiled code.
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
Shared libraries are distributed as <filename>*.so</filename> files. (Neither <filename>*.a</filename> files nor <filename>*.la</filename> files)
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
Shared libraries are mainly used to share common codes among multiple executables with the <command>ld</command> mechanism.
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
Shared libraries are sometimes used to provide multiple plugins to an executable with the <command>dlopen</command> mechanism.
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
Shared libraries export <ulink url="&symbol;">symbols</ulink> which represent compiled objects such as variables, functions, and classes; and enables access to them from the linked executables. 
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
The <ulink url="&soname;">SONAME</ulink> of a shared library <filename>lib<replaceable>foo</replaceable>.so</filename>.<replaceable>1</replaceable>: <literal>objdump -p lib<replaceable>foo</replaceable>.so.<replaceable>1</replaceable> | grep SONAME</literal>
<footnote>
<para>
Alternatively: <literal>readelf -d lib<replaceable>foo</replaceable>.so.<replaceable>1</replaceable> | grep SONAME</literal>
</para>
</footnote>
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
The SONAME of a shared library usually matches the library file name (but not always).
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
The SONAME of shared libraries linked to <filename><replaceable>/usr/bin/foo</replaceable></filename>: <literal>objdump -p <replaceable>/usr/bin/foo</replaceable> | grep NEEDED</literal>
<footnote>
<para>
Alternatively: <literal>readelf -d lib<replaceable>foo</replaceable>.so.<replaceable>1</replaceable> | grep NEEDED</literal>
</para>
</footnote>
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
<systemitem role="package">lib<replaceable>foo</replaceable><replaceable>1</replaceable></systemitem>: the library package for the shared library <filename>lib<replaceable>foo</replaceable>.so.<replaceable>1</replaceable></filename> with the SONAME ABI version <replaceable>1</replaceable>.<footnote><para>See <ulink url="&policy-runtime;">Debian Policy Manual, 8.1 "Run-time shared libraries"</ulink>.</para></footnote>
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
The package maintainer scripts of the library package must call <command>ldconfig</command> under the specific circumstances to create the necessary symbolic links for the SONAME.<footnote><para>See <ulink url="&policy-ldconfig;">Debian Policy Manual, 8.1.1 "ldconfig"</ulink>.</para></footnote>
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
<systemitem role="package">lib<replaceable>foo</replaceable><replaceable>1</replaceable>-dbg</systemitem>: the debugging symbols package which contains the debugging symbols for the shared library package <systemitem role="package">lib<replaceable>foo</replaceable><replaceable>1</replaceable></systemitem>.
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
<systemitem role="package">lib<replaceable>foo</replaceable>-dev</systemitem>: the development package which contains the header files etc. for the shared library <filename>lib<replaceable>foo</replaceable>.so.<replaceable>1</replaceable></filename>.<footnote><para>See <ulink url="&policy-static;">Debian Policy Manual, 8.3 "Static libraries"</ulink> and <ulink url="&policy-dev;">Debian Policy Manual, 8.4 "Development files"</ulink>.</para></footnote>
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
Debian package should not contain <filename>*.la</filename> Libtool archive files in general.<footnote><para>See <ulink url="&removela;">Debian wiki ReleaseGoals/LAFileRemoval</ulink>.</para></footnote>
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
Debian package should not use RPATH in general.<footnote><para>See <ulink url="&rpathissues;">Debian wiki RpathIssue</ulink>.</para></footnote>
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
Although it is somewhat outdated and is only a secondary reference, <ulink url="&debianlibrarypackagingguide;">Debian Library Packaging Guide</ulink> may still be useful.
</para>
</listitem>
</itemizedlist>
</section>

<section id="librarysymbols"><title>Managing <filename>debian/<replaceable>package</replaceable>.symbols</filename></title>
<para>
When you package a shared library, you should create <filename>debian/<replaceable>package</replaceable>.symbols</filename> file to manage the minimal version associated to each symbol for backward-compatible ABI changes under the same SONAME of the library for the same shared library package name.<footnote><para>Backward-incompatible ABI changes normally require you to update the SONAME of the library and the shared library package name to new ones.</para></footnote>  You should read the following primary references in detail.
</para>
<itemizedlist>
<listitem>
<para>
<ulink url="&policy-library-symbols;">Debian Policy Manual, 8.6.3 "The symbols system"</ulink><footnote><para>For C++ libraries and other cases where tracking individual symbols is too difficult, follow <ulink url="&policy-library-shlibs;">Debian Policy Manual, 8.6.4 "The shlibs system"</ulink>, instead.</para></footnote>
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
<citerefentry> <refentrytitle>dh_makeshlibs</refentrytitle> <manvolnum>1</manvolnum> </citerefentry>
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
<citerefentry> <refentrytitle>dpkg-gensymbols</refentrytitle> <manvolnum>1</manvolnum> </citerefentry>
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
<citerefentry> <refentrytitle>dpkg-shlibdeps</refentrytitle> <manvolnum>1</manvolnum> </citerefentry>
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
<citerefentry> <refentrytitle>deb-symbols</refentrytitle> <manvolnum>5</manvolnum> </citerefentry>
</para>
</listitem>
</itemizedlist>
<para>
Here is a rough example to create the <systemitem role="package">libfoo1</systemitem> package to the upstream version <literal>1.3</literal> with the proper <filename>debian/libfoo1.symbols</filename> file.
</para>

<itemizedlist>
<listitem>
<para>
Prepare the skeleton debianized source tree using the upstream <filename>libfoo-1.3.tar.gz</filename> file.
</para>
<itemizedlist>
<listitem>
<para>
If this is the first packaging of the <systemitem role="package">libfoo1</systemitem> package, create the <filename>debian/libfoo1.symbols</filename> file with empty content.
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
If the previous upstream version <literal>1.2</literal> was packaged as the <systemitem role="package">libfoo1</systemitem> package with the proper <filename>debian/libfoo1.symbols</filename> in its source package, use it again.
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
If the previous upstream version <literal>1.2</literal> was not packaged with the <filename>debian/libfoo1.symbols</filename>, create it as the <filename>symbols</filename> file from all available binary packages of the same shared library package name containing the same SONAME of the library, for example, versions <literal>1.1-1</literal> and <literal>1.2-1</literal>.
<footnote>
<para>
All previous versions of Debian packages are available at <ulink url="&snapshot;">http://snapshot.debian.org/</ulink>.  The Debian revision is dropped from the version to make it easier to backport the package: <literal>1.1</literal> &lt;&lt; <literal>1.1-1~bpo70+1</literal> &lt;&lt; <literal>1.1-1</literal> and  <literal>1.2</literal> &lt;&lt; <literal>1.2-1~bpo70+1</literal> &lt;&lt; <literal>1.2-1</literal>
</para>
</footnote>
</para>
<screen>
$ dpkg-deb -x libfoo1_1.1-1.deb libfoo1_1.1-1
$ dpkg-deb -x libfoo1_1.2-1.deb libfoo1_1.2-1
$ : > symbols
$ dpkg-gensymbols -v1.1 -plibfoo1 -Plibfoo1_1.1-1 -Osymbols
$ dpkg-gensymbols -v1.2 -plibfoo1 -Plibfoo1_1.2-1 -Osymbols
</screen>
</listitem>
</itemizedlist>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
Make trial builds of the source tree with tools such as <command>debuild</command> and <command>pdebuild</command>.  (If this fails due to missing symbols etc., there were some backward-incompatible ABI changes which require you to bump the shared library package name to something like <systemitem role="package">libfoo1a</systemitem> and you should start over again.)
</para>
<screen>
$ cd libfoo-1.3
$ debuild
...
dpkg-gensymbols: warning: some new symbols appeared in the symbols file: ...
 see diff output below
--- debian/libfoo1.symbols (libfoo1_1.3-1_amd64)
+++ dpkg-gensymbolsFE5gzx        2012-11-11 02:24:53.609667389 +0900
@@ -127,6 +127,7 @@
  foo_get_name@Base 1.1
  foo_get_longname@Base 1.2
  foo_get_type@Base 1.1
+ foo_get_longtype@Base 1.3-1
  foo_get_symbol@Base 1.1
  foo_get_rank@Base 1.1
  foo_new@Base 1.1
...
</screen>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
If you see the diff printed by the <command>dpkg-gensymbols</command> as above, extract the updated proper <filename>symbols</filename> file from the generated binary package of the shared library.
<footnote>
<para>
The Debian revision is dropped from the version to make it easier to backport the package: <literal>1.3</literal> &lt;&lt; <literal>1.3-1~bpo70+1</literal> &lt;&lt; <literal>1.3-1</literal>
</para>
</footnote>
</para>
<screen>
$ cd ..
$ dpkg-deb -R  libfoo1_1.3_amd64.deb libfoo1-tmp
$ sed -e 's/1\.3-1/1\.3/' libfoo1-tmp/DEBIAN/symbols \
        >libfoo-1.3/debian/libfoo1.symbols
</screen>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
Build release packages with tools such as <command>debuild</command> and <command>pdebuild</command>.
</para>
<screen>
$ cd libfoo-1.3
$ debuild clean
$ debuild
...
</screen>
</listitem>
</itemizedlist>

<para>
In addition to the above examples, we need to check the ABI compatibility further and bump versions for some symbols manually as needed.
<footnote>
<para>
See <ulink url="&policy-library-abi;">Debian Policy Manual, 8.6.2 "Shared library ABI changes"</ulink>.
</para>
</footnote>
</para>

<para>
Although it is only a secondary reference, <ulink url="&usingsymbolsfiles;">Debian wiki UsingSymbolsFiles</ulink> and its linked web pages may be useful.
</para>
</section>

<section id="multiarch"><title>Multiarch</title>
<para>
The multiarch feature introduced to Debian wheezy integrates support for cross-architecture installation of binary packages (particularly <literal>i386</literal>&lt;-&gt;<literal>amd64</literal>, but also other combinations) in <systemitem role="package">dpkg</systemitem> and <systemitem role="package">apt</systemitem>.  You should read the following references in detail.</para>
<itemizedlist>
<listitem>
<para>
<ulink url="&multiarchspec;">Ubuntu wiki MultiarchSpec</ulink> (upstream)
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
<ulink url="&multiarchimplementation;">Debian wiki Multiarch/Implementation</ulink> (Debian situation)
</para>
</listitem>
</itemizedlist>

<para>
It uses the triplet such as <literal>i386-linux-gnu</literal> and <literal>x86_64-linux-gnu</literal> for the install path of shared libraries. The actual triplet path is dynamically set into <literal>$(DEB_HOST_MULTIARCH)</literal> value by <citerefentry> <refentrytitle>dpkg-architecture</refentrytitle> <manvolnum>1</manvolnum> </citerefentry> for each build.  For example, the path to install multiarch libraries are changed as follows.<footnote><para>Old special purpose library paths such as <filename>/lib32/</filename> and <filename>/lib64/</filename> are not used any more.</para></footnote>
</para>

<informaltable id="tripletpaths" pgwide="0" frame="topbot" rowsep="1" colsep="1">
<tgroup cols="3">
  <colspec colwidth="15*" align="left"/> <colspec colwidth="30*" align="left"/> <colspec colwidth="30*" align="left"/>
  <thead>
    <row> <entry>Old path</entry>                        <entry>i386 multiarch path</entry>                           <entry>amd64 multiarch path</entry>                             </row>
  </thead>                                                                                                                                                                          
  <tbody>                                                                                                                                                                           
    <row> <entry><filename>/lib/</filename></entry>      <entry><filename>/lib/i386-linux-gnu/</filename></entry>     <entry><filename>/lib/x86_64-linux-gnu/</filename></entry>      </row>
    <row> <entry><filename>/usr/lib/</filename></entry>  <entry><filename>/usr/lib/i386-linux-gnu/</filename></entry> <entry><filename>/usr/lib/x86_64-linux-gnu/</filename></entry>  </row>
  </tbody>
</tgroup>
</informaltable>

<para>
Here are some typical multiarch package split scenario examples for the followings:
</para>
<itemizedlist>
<listitem>
<para>
a library source <filename>lib<replaceable>foo</replaceable>-1.tar.gz</filename>
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
a tool source <filename><replaceable>bar</replaceable>-1.tar.gz</filename> written in a compiled language
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
a tool source <filename><replaceable>baz</replaceable>-1.tar.gz</filename> written in an interpreted language
</para>
</listitem>
</itemizedlist>

<informaltable id="multiarchtable" pgwide="0" frame="topbot" rowsep="1" colsep="1">
<tgroup cols="4">
  <colspec colwidth="16*" align="left"/> <colspec colwidth="11*" align="left"/> <colspec colwidth="11*" align="left"/> <colspec colwidth="42*" align="left"/>
  <thead>
    <row>  <entry>Package</entry> <entry>Architecture:</entry>                        <entry>Multi-Arch:</entry> 
        <entry>Package content</entry>
    </row>
  </thead>                                                                                                              
  <tbody>                                                                                                               
<row> <entry><systemitem role="package">lib<replaceable>foo</replaceable><replaceable>1</replaceable></systemitem></entry> <entry>any</entry>      <entry>same</entry> 
<entry>
the shared library, co-installable
</entry>
</row>
<row> <entry><systemitem role="package">lib<replaceable>foo</replaceable><replaceable>1</replaceable>-dbg</systemitem></entry> <entry>any</entry>      <entry>same</entry> 
<entry>
the shared library debug symbols, co-installable
</entry>
</row>
<row> <entry><systemitem role="package">lib<replaceable>foo</replaceable>-dev</systemitem></entry> <entry>any</entry>      <entry>same</entry> 
<entry>
the shared library header files etc., co-installable
</entry>
</row>
<row> <entry><systemitem role="package">lib<replaceable>foo</replaceable>-tools</systemitem></entry> <entry>any</entry>      <entry>foreign</entry> 
<entry>
the run-time support programs, not co-installable
</entry>
</row>
<row> <entry><systemitem role="package">lib<replaceable>foo</replaceable>-doc</systemitem></entry> <entry>all</entry>      <entry>allowed</entry> 
<entry>
the shared library documentation files
</entry>
</row>
<row> <entry><systemitem role="package"><replaceable>bar</replaceable></systemitem></entry> <entry>any</entry>      <entry>foreign</entry> 
<entry>
the compiled program files, not co-installable
</entry>
</row>
<row> <entry><systemitem role="package"><replaceable>bar</replaceable>-doc</systemitem></entry> <entry>all</entry>      <entry>allowed</entry> 
<entry>
the documentation files for the program
</entry>
</row>
<row> <entry><systemitem role="package"><replaceable>baz</replaceable></systemitem></entry> <entry>all</entry>           <entry>allowed</entry> 
<entry>
the interpreted program files
</entry>
</row>
  </tbody>
</tgroup>
</informaltable>
<para>
Please note that the development package should contain a symlink for the associated shared library <emphasis role="strong">without a version number</emphasis>.  E.g.: <filename>/usr/lib/x86_64-linux-gnu/libfoo.so</filename> -&gt; <filename>libfoo.so.1</filename>
</para>
</section>

<section id="librarypackage"><title>Building a shared library package</title>
<para>
You can build a Debian library package enabling the multiarch support using <citerefentry> <refentrytitle>dh</refentrytitle> <manvolnum>1</manvolnum> </citerefentry> as follows. 
</para>
<itemizedlist>
<listitem>
<para>
Update <filename>debian/control</filename>.
</para>
<itemizedlist>
<listitem>
<para>
Add <literal>Build-Depends: debhelper (>= 9)</literal> for the source package section.
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
Add <literal>Pre-Depends: ${misc:Pre-Depends}</literal> for each shared library binary package.
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
Add <literal>Multi-Arch:</literal> stanza for each binary package section.
</para>
</listitem>
</itemizedlist>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
Set <filename>debian/compat</filename> to "9".
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
Adjust the path from the normal <literal>/usr/lib/</literal> to the multiarch <literal>/usr/lib/$(DEB_HOST_MULTIARCH)/</literal> for all packaging scripts.
</para>
<itemizedlist>
<listitem>
<para>
Call <literal>DEB_HOST_MULTIARCH ?= $(shell dpkg-architecture -qDEB_HOST_MULTIARCH)</literal> in <filename>debian/rules</filename> to set <literal>DEB_HOST_MULTIARCH</literal> variable, first.
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
Replace <literal>/usr/lib/</literal> with <literal>/usr/lib/$(DEB_HOST_MULTIARCH)/</literal> in <filename>debian/rules</filename>.
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
If <literal>./configure</literal> is used in the part of <literal>override_dh_auto_configure</literal> target in <filename>debian/rules</filename>, make sure to replace it with <literal>dh_auto_configure -- </literal>.
<footnote>
<para>
Alternatively, you can add <literal>--libdir=\$${prefix}/lib/$(DEB_HOST_MULTIARCH)</literal> and <literal>--libexecdir=\$${prefix}/lib/$(DEB_HOST_MULTIARCH)</literal> arguments to <literal>./configure</literal>.  Please note that <literal>--libexecdir</literal> specifies the default path to install executable programs run by other programs rather than by users.  Its Autotools default is <filename>/usr/libexec/</filename> but its Debian default is <filename>/usr/lib/</filename>.
</para>
</footnote>
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
Replace all occurrences of <literal>/usr/lib/</literal> with <literal>/usr/lib/*/</literal> in <filename>debian/<replaceable>foo</replaceable>.install</filename> files.
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
Generate files like <filename>debian/<replaceable>foo</replaceable>.links</filename> from <filename>debian/<replaceable>foo</replaceable>.links.in</filename> dynamically by adding a script to <literal>override_dh_auto_configure</literal> target in <filename>debian/rules</filename>.
</para>
<screen>
override_dh_auto_configure:
        dh_auto_configure
        sed 's/@DEB_HOST_MULTIARCH@/$(DEB_HOST_MULTIARCH)/g' \
                debian/<replaceable>foo</replaceable>.links.in > debian/<replaceable>foo</replaceable>.links
</screen>
</listitem>
</itemizedlist>
</listitem>
</itemizedlist>
<para>
Please make sure to verify that the shared library package contains only the expected files, and that your -dev package still works.
</para>
<para>
All files installed simultaneously as the multiarch package to the same file path should have exactly the same file content.  You must be careful on differences generated by the data byte order and by the compression algorithm.
</para>
</section>

</appendix>
</book>

