<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE chapter PUBLIC "-//OASIS//DTD DocBook XML V4.5//EN"
  "http://www.oasis-open.org/docbook/xml/4.5/docbookx.dtd" [
  <!ENTITY % shareddata   SYSTEM "../release-notes.ent" > %shareddata;
]>

<chapter id="ch-about" lang="en">
  <title>Introduction</title>
  <para>
    This document informs users of the &debian; distribution about major changes
in version &release; (codenamed "&releasename;").
  </para>
  <para>
    The release notes provide information on how to upgrade safely from the
release &oldrelease; (codenamed &oldreleasename;) to the current release and
inform users of known potential issues they could encounter in that process.
  </para>
  <para>
    You can get the most recent version of this document from <ulink
url="&url-release-notes;"></ulink>.  If in doubt, check the date of document
at the first page and make sure you are reading a current version.
  </para>
  <caution>
    <para>
      Note that it is impossible to list every known issue and that therefore a
selection has been made based on a combination of the expected prevalence
and impact of issues.
    </para>
  </caution>
<para>
Please note that we only support and document upgrading from the previous
release of Debian (in this case, the upgrade from &oldrelease;).  If you
need to upgrade from older releases, we suggest you read previous editions
of the release notes and upgrade to &oldrelease; first.
</para>

<section id="bug-reports">
<title>Reporting bugs on this document</title>
<para>
We have attempted to test all the different upgrade steps described in this
document and we have also tried to anticipate all the possible issues our
users might encounter.
</para>
<para>
Nevertheless, if you think you have found any bug in this documentation
(incorrect information or information that is missing), please file a bug in
the <ulink url="&url-bts;">bug tracking system</ulink> against the
<systemitem role="package">release-notes</systemitem> package.
</para>
</section>

<section id="upgrade-reports">
<title>Contributing upgrade reports</title>
<para>
We welcome any information from users related to upgrades from
&oldreleasename; to &releasename;.  If you are willing to share information
please file a bug in the <ulink url="&url-bts;">bug tracking system</ulink>
against the <systemitem role="package">upgrade-reports</systemitem> package
with your results.  We request that you compress any attachments that are
included (using <command>gzip</command>).
</para>
<para>
Please include the following information when submitting your upgrade
report:
</para>
<itemizedlist>
<listitem>
<para>

<programlisting condition="fixme">
TODO: check status of #494028 about apt-get vs. aptitude
TODO: any more things to add here?
</programlisting>

The status of your package database before and after the upgrade:
<command>dpkg</command>'s status database available at
<filename>/var/lib/dpkg/status</filename> and <command>aptitude</command>'s
package state information, available at
<filename>/var/lib/aptitude/pkgstates</filename>.  You should have made a
backup before the upgrade as described at <xref linkend="data-backup"/> ,
but you can also find backups of this information in
<filename>/var/backups</filename>.
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
Session logs using <command>script</command>, as described in <xref
linkend="record-session"/>.
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
Your <systemitem role="package">apt</systemitem> logs, available at
<filename>/var/log/apt/term.log</filename> or your
<command>aptitude</command> logs, available at
<filename>/var/log/aptitude</filename>.
</para>
</listitem>
</itemizedlist>
<note>
  <para>
    You should take some time to review and remove any sensitive and/or
confidential information from the logs before including them in a bug report
as the information will be published in a public database.
  </para>
</note>
</section>

<section id="sources">
  <title>Sources for this document</title>
  <para>
    The source of this document is in DocBook XML<indexterm><primary>DocBook
XML</primary></indexterm> format. The HTML version is generated using
<systemitem role="package">docbook-xsl</systemitem> and <systemitem
role="package">xsltproc</systemitem>. The PDF version is generated using
<systemitem role="package">dblatex</systemitem> or <systemitem
role="package">xmlroff</systemitem>. Sources for the Release Notes are
available in the SVN repository of the <emphasis>Debian Documentation
Project</emphasis>.  You can use the <ulink
url="&url-svn-release-notes;">web interface</ulink> to access its files
individually through the web and see their changes.  For more information on
how to access the SVN please consult the <ulink
url="&url-ddp-svn-info;">Debian Documentation Project SVN pages</ulink>.
  </para>
</section>
</chapter>
