I'd say we both do the introductory talk. We have to work on it soon (I was
gathering up material and used it for an introductory i18n talk to the
spanish l10n team recently) and write a "paper" that would be circulated to
all the people at Debconf before the round table. The introductory talk
(slides) would be a summary of that paper. Topics I would like to cover in
the paper (and I have a paper in spanish I would like to reuse):

- i18n/l10n projects in Debian:
	* [jfs] WWW
	* [bubulle] Programs (Debian-specific po translation)
	* [bubulle] Debconf (which is Debian specific)
        * [jfs] Documentation (DDP + installer + manpages)
        * [?] DDTP
	* [jfs] -XX (where XX is the language code) packages 
	* [jfs] localization-config
	* [bubulle] language-tasks

- [bubulle] i18n/l10n infrastructure in Debian:
     * statistics
     * [jfs] translation robot

- i18n/l10n tools:
     * [jfs] Generic tools
     * [jfs] wml "translation-header"
     * [thomas huriaux, nicolas francois, bubulle] po4a
     * [denis, bubulle] debconf-updatepo
     * [jfs] doc-check (used by some docs in the DDP and by d-i)
     * [denis, bubulle] use of BTS for translations

- interaction with other i18n projects
     * [jfs] packaging of translations
     * [jfs] bug reports on upstream translations
       [jfs]  Describe problem of lousy translations 

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

> Then, a few more specific topics will be covered briefly by a few
> people invited at the round table, in about 5 minutes each.

That's good. It would be great if we could get all to write (an expand) based
on a draft version of the paper.


> I already have identified a few topics, and sometimes names:
> 
> -correct i18n of software in Debian (K. Muto)
> -Debian and UTF-8 (Denis Barbier, Eugenyi Mescheryakov?)
> -Debian WWW i18n (J. Wrage?)

   I implemented the 'translation-header' wml stuff, so I could talk about
   this.

> -Debian native software i18n and l10n (bubulle?)
> -Translation team work (jfs, bubulle, Guillem)
> -DDTP (Michael Bramer/Otavio Salvador)
> -i18n/l10n in Ubuntu (M. Vogt)
> -General l10n infrastructure (Denis Barbier)

> Javier, can you give me your advice about this? If you prefer we might
> arrange an IRC talk together about this way to start things....

Yes, let's meet on IRC to talk about this. What time slots / days are best
for you?

Javier
