<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE chapter PUBLIC "-//OASIS//DTD DocBook XML V4.5//EN"
  "http://www.oasis-open.org/docbook/xml/4.5/docbookx.dtd" [
  <!ENTITY % shareddata   SYSTEM "../release-notes.ent" > %shareddata;
]>

<chapter id="ch-installing" lang="en">
<title>Installation System</title>
<para>
The Debian Installer is the official installation system for Debian.  It offers
a variety of installation methods.  Which methods are available to install your
system depends on your architecture.
</para>
<para>
Images of the installer for &releasename; can be found together with
the Installation Guide on the <ulink url="&url-installer;">Debian
website</ulink>.
</para>
<para>
The Installation Guide is also included on the first CD/DVD of the official
Debian CD/DVD sets, at:
</para>
<screen>
/doc/install/manual/<replaceable>language</replaceable>/index.html
</screen>
<para>
You may also want to check
the <ulink url="&url-installer;index#errata">errata</ulink> for
debian-installer for a list of known issues.
</para>
<section id="inst-new">
<title>What's new in the installation system?</title>
<para>
There has been a lot of development on the Debian Installer since its first
official release with &oldreleasename; resulting in both improved hardware support and
some exciting new features.
</para>
<para>
In these Release Notes we'll only list the major changes in the
installer.  If you are interested in an overview of the detailed
changes since &oldreleasename;, please check the release announcements
for the &releasename; beta and RC releases available from the Debian
Installer's <ulink url="&url-installer-news;">news history</ulink>.
</para>
<section id="inst-changes">
<title>Major changes</title>
<variablelist>
<varlistentry>
<term>More flexible partitioning</term>
<listitem>
<para>
It is now possible to set up file systems on an <acronym>LVM</acronym> volume using guided
partitioning.
</para>
<para>
The installer is also able to set up encrypted file systems.  Using manual
partitioning you have the choice between <literal>dm-crypt</literal> and
<literal>loop-aes</literal>, using a passphrase or a random key, and you can
tune various other options.  Using guided partitioning, the installer will
create an encrypted <acronym>LVM</acronym> partition that contains any other file systems (except
<filename>/boot</filename>) as logical volumes.
</para>
</listitem>
</varlistentry>
<varlistentry>
<term>Graphical user interface</term>
<listitem>
<para>
If you prefer a graphical user interface, try booting the installer with
<literal>installgui</literal>.
</para>
<para>
The functionality of the graphical installer is almost identical to the regular
installer, only the presentation differs.  There is one exception: the
graphical frontend does not support setting up encrypted partitions using
random keys.
</para>
<para>
The major advantage of the graphical user interface is that it supports more
languages than the regular user interface (newt).  Information about the
graphical installer and the most important differences between the graphical
and regular installer are documented in an appendix in the installation guide.
</para>
<note>
  <para>
    The graphical user interface is not available for all architectures.
  </para>
</note>
</listitem>
</varlistentry>
<varlistentry>
<term>Rescue mode</term>
<listitem>
<para>
You can use the installer to solve problems with your system, for example when
it refuses to boot.  The first steps will be just like a regular installation,
but the installer will not start the partitioner.  Instead it will offer you a
menu of rescue options.
</para>
<para>
Activate the rescue mode by booting the installer with
<literal>rescue</literal>, or by adding a boot parameter
<literal>rescue/enable=true</literal>.
</para>
</listitem>
</varlistentry>
<varlistentry>
<term>Using sudo instead of root account</term>
<listitem>
<para>
During expert installations you can choose to not set up the root account (it
will be locked), but instead set up <command>sudo</command> so that the first
user can use that for system administration.
</para>
</listitem>
</varlistentry>
<varlistentry>
<term>Simplified mail configuration</term>
<listitem>
<para>
If the <quote>standard system</quote> is installed, the installer sets up a basic
configuration for the system's mail server which will only provide for local
e-mail delivery.  The mail server will be unavailable to other systems
connected to the same network.  If you want to configure your system to handle
e-mail not local to the system (either to send e-mail or to receive it), you
will have to reconfigure the mail system after installation.
</para>
</listitem>
</varlistentry>
<varlistentry>
<term>Desktop selection</term>
<listitem>
<para>
The installation system will install a GNOME desktop as the default desktop if
the user asks for one.
</para>
<para>
However, users wishing to install alternate desktop environments can easily do
so by adding boot parameters: <literal>tasks="standard, kde-desktop"</literal>
for KDE and <literal>tasks="standard, xfce-desktop"</literal> for Xfce.  Note
that this will not work when installing from a full CD image without using a
network mirror as an additional package source; it will work when using a DVD
image or any other installation method.
</para>
<para>
There are also separate CD images available that install the KDE or Xfce
desktop environment by default.
</para>
</listitem>
</varlistentry>
<varlistentry>
<term>New languages</term>
<listitem>
<para>
Thanks to the huge efforts of translators, Debian can now be installed in 47
languages using the text-based installation user interface.  This is six
languages more than in &oldreleasename;.  Languages added in this release include
Belarusian, Esperanto, Estonian, Kurdish, Macedonian, Tagalog, Vietnamese and
Wolof.  Due to lack of translation updates, two languages have been dropped in
this release: Persian and Welsh.
</para>
<para>
If the graphical user interface is used, an additional eleven languages are
supported.  These languages can only be selected using this installer as their
character sets cannot be presented in a non-graphical environment.  The new
languages are: Bengali, Dzongkha, Gujarati, Hindi, Georgian, Khmer, Malayalam,
Nepali, Punjabi, Tamil and Thai.
</para>
<para>
Users that do not wish to use any locale can now select <emphasis>C</emphasis>
as their preferred locale in the installer's language selection.  More
information on language coverage is available at the <ulink
url="&url-d-i-i18n;">d-i languages
list</ulink>.
</para>
</listitem>
</varlistentry>
<varlistentry>
<term>Simplified localization and timezone selection</term>
<listitem>
<para>
Configuration of language, countries and timezones has been simplified to
reduce the amount of information needed from the user.  The installer will now
guess what the system's country and timezone is based on the language selected,
or will provide a limited selection if it cannot.  Users can still introduce
obscure combinations if need be.
</para>
</listitem>
</varlistentry>
<varlistentry>
<term>Improved system-wide localization</term>
<listitem>
<para>
Most of the internationalization and localization tasks that were previously
handled by the <systemitem role="package">localization-config</systemitem> tool
are now included in the stock Debian installer or in packages themselves.  This
means that selection of a language will automatically install packages
necessary for that language (dictionaries, documentation, fonts...) in both
standard and desktop environments.  Configuration that is no longer handled
automatically includes the papersize configuration and some advanced X Windows
keyboard settings for some languages.
</para>
<para>
Note that language-specific packages will only be installed automatically if
they are available during the installation.
</para>
</listitem>
</varlistentry>
</variablelist>
</section>

<section id="inst-auto">
<title>Automated installation</title>
<para>
A lot of the changes mentioned in the previous section also imply changes in
the support in the installer for automated installation using preconfiguration
files.  This means that if you have existing preconfiguration files that worked
with the &oldreleasename; installer, you cannot expect these to work with the new
installer without modification.
</para>
<para>
The good news is that the <ulink
url="&url-install-manual;">Installation
Guide</ulink> now has a separate appendix with extensive documentation on using
preconfiguration.
</para>
<para>
The &releasename; installer introduces some exciting new features that allow further and
easier automation of installs.  It also adds support for advanced partitioning
using <acronym>RAID</acronym>, <acronym>LVM</acronym> and encrypted <acronym>LVM</acronym>.  See the documentation for details.
</para>
</section>

<section id="install-with-braille">
  <title>Install &debian; with a braille display</title>

  <para>
    You can install &debian; &release; (&releasename;) with a braille
    display. The braille display must be connected to a
    <acronym>USB</acronym> or a serial port. If your braille display
    is connected to a <acronym>USB</acronym> port and the American
    braille table is supposed to be used, you can press
    <keycap>Enter</keycap> in the boot menu. The screen reader BrlTTY
    is standardized to search for braille displays at the
    <acronym>USB</acronym> port and uses the American Braille
    table. If the braille display is connected to a serial port or if
    you want to use a different braille table, you have to press the
    <keycap>Tab</keycap> key in the boot menu first. Then, you can
    configure the screen reader BrlTTY with the kernel parameter
    brltty.
  </para>

  <para>
    For the parameter, the following syntax is valid:
  </para>

  <programlisting>brltty=<replaceable>driver</replaceable>,<replaceable>device</replaceable>,<replaceable>table</replaceable></programlisting>

  <para>
    All operands are optional.
  </para>

  <variablelist>
    <varlistentry>
      <term><varname>driver</varname></term>
      <listitem>
	<para>
	  The driver for the employed braille display. Here, you must
	  enter either a code consisting of two letters or the word
	  <literal>auto</literal>. If this argument is not entered, the automated
	  recognition is activated by default.
	</para>
      </listitem>
    </varlistentry>
    <varlistentry>
      <term><varname>device</varname></term>
      <listitem>
	<para>
	  The device can be entered as relative to /dev/ as well as an
	  absolute specification.
	</para>
      </listitem>
    </varlistentry>
    <varlistentry>
      <term><varname>table</varname></term>
      <listitem>
	<para>
	  Defines the braille table for the desired language. By
	  default, the US table is employed.
	</para>
      </listitem>
    </varlistentry>
  </variablelist>

  <section id="braille-examples">
    <title>Examples</title>

    <programlisting>brltty=ht,ttyS0,de</programlisting>

    <para>
      The Handy Tech Driver is used. The braille display is connected
      to Com1.  The German braille table is used.
    </para>

    <programlisting>brltty=,,de</programlisting>

    <para>
      Here, only the German braille table is specified. Therefore,
      BrlTTY will try to find a braille display at a
      <acronym>USB</acronym> port.
    </para>
  </section>
</section>
</section>

<section id="popcon">
<title>Popularity contest</title>
<para>
The installation system will again offer to install the <systemitem
role="package">popularity-contest</systemitem> package.  This package was not
installed by default in &oldreleasename; but it was installed in older releases.
</para>
<para>
<systemitem role="package">popularity-contest</systemitem> provides the Debian
project with valuable information on which packages in the distribution are
actually used.  This information is used mainly to decide the order in which
packages are included on installation CD-ROMs, but is also often consulted by
Debian developers in deciding whether or not to adopt a package that no longer
has a maintainer.
</para>
<para>
Information from <systemitem role="package">popularity-contest</systemitem> is
processed anonymously.  We would appreciate it if you would participate in this
official survey, helping to improve Debian.
</para>
</section>

</chapter>

