<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE appendix PUBLIC "-//OASIS//DTD DocBook XML V4.5//EN"
  "http://www.oasis-open.org/docbook/xml/4.5/docbookx.dtd" [
  <!ENTITY % shareddata   SYSTEM "../release-notes.ent" > %shareddata;
]>

<appendix id="ap-old-stuff" lang="en">
<title>Managing your &oldreleasename; system before the upgrade</title>
<para>
This appendix contains information on how to make sure you can install or
upgrade &oldreleasename; packages before you upgrade to &releasename;.  This should only be
necessary in specific situations.
</para>
<section id="old-upgrade">
<title>Upgrading your &oldreleasename; system</title>
<para>
Basically this is no different than any other upgrade of &oldreleasename; you've been
doing.  The only difference is that you first need to make sure your package
list still contains references to &oldreleasename; as explained in <xref
linkend="old-sources"/>.
</para>
<para>
If you upgrade your system using a Debian mirror, it will automatically be
upgraded to the latest &oldreleasename; point release.
</para>
</section>

<section id="old-sources">
<title>Checking your sources list</title>
<para>
If any of the lines in your <filename>/etc/apt/sources.list</filename> refer to
'stable', you are effectively already <quote>using</quote> &releasename;. This 
might not be what you want if you are not ready yet for the upgrade.  If
you have already run
<literal>apt-get update</literal>, you can still get back without problems
following the procedure below.
</para>
<para>
If you have also already installed packages from &releasename;, there probably
is not much point in installing packages from &oldreleasename; anymore.  In
that case you will have to decide for yourself whether you want to continue or
not.  It is possible to downgrade packages, but that is not covered here.
</para>
<para>
Open the file <filename>/etc/apt/sources.list</filename> with your favorite
editor (as <literal>root</literal>) and check all lines beginning with
<literal>deb http:</literal> or <literal>deb ftp:</literal> for a reference to
<quote><literal>stable</literal></quote>.  If you find any, change
<literal>stable</literal> to <literal>&oldreleasename;</literal>.
</para>
<para>
If you have any lines starting with <literal>deb file:</literal>, you will have
to check for yourself if the location they refer to contains an
&oldreleasename; or a &releasename; archive.
</para>
<important>
  <para>
    Do not change any lines that begin with <literal>deb cdrom:</literal>.
    Doing so would invalidate the line and you would have to
    run <command>apt-cdrom</command> again.  Do not be alarmed if a
    'cdrom' source line refers to <quote><literal>unstable</literal></quote>.
    Although confusing, this is normal.
  </para>
</important>
<para>
If you've made any changes, save the file and execute
</para>
<screen>
# apt-get update
</screen>
<para>
to refresh the package list.
</para>
</section>

<section id="old-config">
<title>Removing obsolete configuration files</title>
<para>
Before upgrading your system to &releasename;, it is recommended to remove old
configuration files (such as <filename>*.dpkg-{new,old}</filename> files under
<filename>/etc</filename>, as well as the file
<filename>/etc/X11/XF86Config-4</filename><footnote><para>Since release
2:1.7.7-12, xorg-server no longer reads the file XF86Config-4.  See also <ulink
url="http://bugs.debian.org/619177">#619177</ulink>.</para></footnote>) from
the system.
</para>
</section>

<section id="switch-utf8">

<title>Upgrade legacy locales to UTF-8</title>
<para>
If your system is localised and is using a locale that is not based on UTF-8
you should strongly consider switching your system over to using UTF-8 locales.
In the past, there have been bugs identified that manifest itself only when
using a non-UTF-8 locale. On the desktop, such legacy locales are supported
through ugly hacks in the libraries internals, and we cannot decently provide
support for users who still use them.
</para>
<para>
To configure your system's locale you can run <command>dpkg-reconfigure
locales</command>. Ensure you select an UTF-8 locale when you are presented
with the question asking which locale to use as a default in the system.  In
addition, you should review the locale settings of your users and ensure that
they do not have legacy locales definitions in their configuration
environment.
</para>

</section>

</appendix>

