<?xml version='1.0' encoding='utf-8'?>
<!DOCTYPE chapter PUBLIC "-//OASIS//DTD DocBook XML V4.5//EN"
  "http://www.oasis-open.org/docbook/xml/4.5/docbookx.dtd" [
  <!ENTITY % shareddata   SYSTEM "../release-notes.ent" > %shareddata;
]>

<chapter id="ch-whats-new" lang="en">
<title>What's new in &debian; &release;</title>
<para>
The <ulink url="&url-wiki-newinwheezy;">Wiki</ulink> has more information
about this topic.
</para>

<!-- 
Sources for architecture status:
  http://release.debian.org/wheezy/arch_qualify.html

Some descriptions of the ports: http://www.debian.org/ports/
-->

<section>
<title>Supported architectures</title>
<para>
  Debian 7.0 introduces two new architectures:
</para>
<itemizedlist>
  <listitem>
    <para>
      s390x, 64-bit port for IBM System z machines intended to replace s390
    </para>
  </listitem>
  <listitem>
    <para>
      armhf, an alternative to armel for ARMv7 machines with hard-float.
A lot of modern ARM boards and devices ship with a floating-point unit (FPU),
but the older Debian armel port doesn't take much advantage of it. The armhf
port was started to improve this situation and also take advantage of other
features of newer ARM CPUs. The Debian armhf port requires at least an ARMv7
CPU with Thumb-2 and VFP3D16 coprocessor.
    </para>
  </listitem>
</itemizedlist>

<para>
The following are the officially supported architectures for &debian;
&releasename;:
</para>
<itemizedlist>
<listitem>
<para>
32-bit PC ('i386')
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
SPARC ('sparc')
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
PowerPC ('powerpc')
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
MIPS ('mips' (big-endian) and 'mipsel' (little-endian))
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
Intel Itanium ('ia64')
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
S/390 ('s390')
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
64-bit PC ('amd64')
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
ARM EABI ('armel')
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
ARMv7 (EABI hard-float ABI, 'armhf')
</para>
</listitem>
<listitem>
<para>
IBM System z ('s390x')
</para>
</listitem>
</itemizedlist>

<!-- Based on http://www.debian.org/News/2010/20100806 -->
<para>In addition to the officially supported architectures, &debian; wheezy
contains the GNU/kFreeBSD ports ('kfreebsd-amd64' and 'kfreebsd-i386')
introduced in &debian; squeeze, as a technology preview.  These ports are the
first ones included in a Debian release which aren't based on the Linux kernel,
but instead use the kernel of FreeBSD with a GNU userland. Users of these versions
however should be warned that the quality of these ports is still catching up
with the outstanding high quality of our Linux ports, and that some advanced
desktop features are not supported yet. However, the support of common server
software is strong and extends the features of Linux-based Debian versions by
the unique features known from the BSD world.
</para>

<para>
You can read more about port status, and port-specific information for your
architecture at the <ulink url="&url-ports;">Debian port
web pages</ulink>.
</para>

</section>

<section id="newforarm" arch="armel">
  <title>What's new for ARM?</title>

  <para>
    Support has been added for Marvell's Kirkwood platform.
    Specifically, Debian GNU/Linux &release; supports the following
    devices based on the Kirkwood platform: <ulink
    url="http://www.cyrius.com/debian/kirkwood/sheevaplug/">SheevaPlug
    and other plug computers</ulink>, QNAP Turbo NAS (<ulink
    url="http://www.cyrius.com/debian/kirkwood/qnap/ts-119/">TS-11x</ulink>,
    <ulink
    url="http://www.cyrius.com/debian/kirkwood/qnap/ts-219/">TS-21x</ulink>,
    <ulink
    url="http://www.cyrius.com/debian/kirkwood/qnap/ts-41x/">TS-41x</ulink>),
    and the <ulink url="http://www.cyrius.com/debian/kirkwood/openrd/">OpenRD
    platform</ulink>.
  </para>
  <para arch="armel">
    Support has also been added for the Lanner EM7210 and compatible
    devices (e.g. Intel SS4000-e).  These are NAS devices based on the
    IOP32x platform.
  </para>
</section>

<section id="newfors390" arch="s390;s390x">
<title>What's new for S390?</title>
<para>
  &debian; wheezy will be the last release to support the 31-bit
  <literal>s390</literal> port. A new 64-bit port called
  <literal>s390x</literal> has been created featuring the same hardware
  support as <literal>s390</literal> in &debian; squeeze. Machines will need
  to be reinstalled with the new port; in-place migration is not possible.
</para>
</section>

<section id="newdistro">
<title>What's new in the distribution?</title>

<programlisting condition="fixme">
 TODO: Make sure you update the numbers in the .ent file 
     using the changes-release.pl script found under ../
</programlisting>

<para>
This new release of Debian again comes with a lot more software than
its predecessor &oldreleasename;; the distribution includes over
&packages-new; new packages, for a total of over &packages-total;
packages.  Most of the software in the distribution has been updated:
over &packages-updated; software packages (this is
&packages-update-percent;% of all packages in &oldreleasename;).
Also, a significant number of packages (over &packages-removed;,
&packages-removed-percent;% of the packages in &oldreleasename;) have
for various reasons been removed from the distribution.  You will not
see any updates for these packages and they will be marked as
'obsolete' in package management front-ends.
</para>

<!-- INFO: For Squeeze this might be useful
http://www.klabs.be/~fpiat/linux/comp-dist2/squeeze/ -->

<para>
With this release, &debian; updates from X.Org 7.5 to X.Org 7.7.
</para>
<para>
  &debian; again ships with several desktop applications and
  environments.  Among others it now includes the desktop environments
  GNOME<indexterm><primary>GNOME</primary></indexterm>
  3.4, KDE<indexterm><primary>KDE</primary></indexterm>
  4.8.4, Xfce<indexterm><primary>Xfce</primary></indexterm> 4.8, and
  LXDE<indexterm><primary>LXDE</primary></indexterm> 0.5.0.
</para>
<para>
  Productivity applications have also been upgraded, including the
  office suites: 
</para>
  <itemizedlist>
  <listitem>
    <para>
      LibreOffice<indexterm><primary>LibreOffice</primary></indexterm>
      3.5 replaces OpenOffice.org, which is now only a transitional package that can be removed;
    </para>
  </listitem>
  <listitem>
    <para>
      Calligra<indexterm><primary>Calligra</primary></indexterm>
      2.4 replaces KOffice, which is now only a transitional package that can be removed;
    </para>
  </listitem>
  <listitem>
    <para>
      GNUcash<indexterm><primary>GNUcash</primary></indexterm> is upgraded to 2.4;
    </para>
  </listitem>
  <listitem>
    <para>
      GNUmeric<indexterm><primary>GNUmeric</primary></indexterm> is upgraded to 1.10;
    </para>
  </listitem>
  <listitem>
    <para>
      Abiword<indexterm><primary>Abiword</primary></indexterm> is upgraded to 2.9.
    </para>
  </listitem>
  </itemizedlist>
<para>
  Updates of other desktop applications include the upgrade to
  Evolution<indexterm><primary>Evolution</primary></indexterm> 3.4
  and Pidgin<indexterm><primary>Pidgin</primary></indexterm> 2.10.6. 
  The Mozilla<indexterm><primary>Mozilla</primary></indexterm> suite has
  also been updated:
  <systemitem role="package">iceweasel</systemitem>
  (version 10 ESR) is the unbranded
  <application>Firefox<indexterm><primary>Firefox</primary></indexterm></application>
  web browser and
  <systemitem role="package">icedove</systemitem>
  (version 10) is the unbranded
  <application>Thunderbird<indexterm><primary>Thunderbird</primary></indexterm></application>
  mail client.
</para>

<!-- Copied from http://wiki.debian.org/NewInWheezy -->
<para>
&debian; &releasename; comes with improved multimedia support:
<systemitem role="package">ffmpeg</systemitem> has been replaced by the
libav fork (<systemitem role="package">libav-tools</systemitem>),
which is considered to feature a more conservative release process and thus
fit better to &debian;'s needs. It provides all libraries and prepares an
upgrade path for existing application packages.
The full-featured libav
libraries and frontends include e.g. <command>mplayer</command>,
<command>mencoder</command>, <command>vlc</command> and
<command>transcode</command>. Additional codec support is provided e.g.
through <command>lame</command> for MP3 audio encoding,
<command>xvidcore</command> for MPEG-4 ASP video encoding,
<command>x264</command> for H.264/MPEG-4 AVC video encoding,
<command>vo-aacenc</command> for AAC audio encoding
and <command>opencore-amr</command> and
<command>vo-amrwbenc</command> for Adaptive Multi-Rate Narrowband and
Wideband encoding and decoding, respectively. For most use cases, installation
of packages from third-party repositories should not be necessary anymore. The
times of crippled multimedia support in &debian; are finally over!
</para>

<!-- JFS: 
Might it be useful point to http://distrowatch.com/table.php?distribution=debian ? 
This provides a more comprehensive comparison among different releases -->

<para>
Among many others, this release also includes the following software updates:
</para>
<informaltable pgwide="1">
  <tgroup cols="3">
    <colspec align="justify"/>
    <colspec align="justify"/>
    <colspec align="justify"/>
    <!-- colspec align="justify" colwidth="3*"/ -->
    <thead>
      <row>
	<entry>Package</entry>
	<entry>Version in &oldrelease; (&oldreleasename;)</entry>
	<entry>Version in &release; (&releasename;)</entry>
      </row>
    </thead>
    <tbody>
      <row id="new-apache2">
	<entry>Apache<indexterm><primary>Apache</primary></indexterm></entry>
	<entry>2.2.16</entry>
	<entry>2.2.22</entry>
      </row>
      <row id="new-bind9">
	<entry>BIND<indexterm><primary>BIND</primary></indexterm> <acronym>DNS</acronym> Server</entry>
	<entry>9.7</entry>
	<entry>9.8</entry>
      </row>
      <row id="new-courier">
	<entry>Courier<indexterm><primary>Courier</primary></indexterm> <acronym>MTA</acronym></entry>
	<entry>0.65</entry>
	<entry>0.68</entry>
      </row>
      <row id="new-dia">
	<entry>Dia<indexterm><primary>Dia</primary></indexterm></entry>
	<entry>0.97.1</entry>
	<entry>0.97.2</entry>
      </row>
      <row id="new-exim4">
	<entry>Exim<indexterm><primary>Exim</primary></indexterm> default email server</entry>
	<entry>4.72</entry>
	<entry>4.80</entry>
      </row>
      <row id="new-gcc">
	<entry><acronym>GNU</acronym> Compiler Collection as default compiler<indexterm><primary>GCC</primary></indexterm></entry>
	<entry>4.4</entry>
	<entry>4.7 on PCs, 4.6 elsewhere</entry>
      </row>
      <row id="new-gimp">
	<entry><acronym>GIMP</acronym><indexterm><primary>GIMP</primary></indexterm></entry>
	<entry>2.6</entry>
	<entry>2.8</entry>
      </row>
      <row id="new-libc6">
	<entry>the <acronym>GNU</acronym> C library</entry>
	<entry>2.11.3</entry>
	<entry>2.13</entry>
      </row>
      <row id="new-lighttpd">
	<entry>lighttpd</entry>
	<entry>1.4.28</entry>
	<entry>1.4.31</entry>
      </row>
      <row id="new-linux-image">
        <entry>Linux kernel image</entry>
        <entry>2.6 series</entry>
        <entry>3.2 series</entry>
      </row>
      <row id="new-maradns">
	<entry>maradns</entry>
	<entry>1.4.03</entry>
	<entry>1.4.12</entry>
      </row>
      <row id="new-mysql">
	<entry>MySQL<indexterm><primary>MySQL</primary></indexterm></entry>
	<entry>5.1</entry>
	<entry>5.5</entry>
      </row>
      <row id="new-openldap">
	<entry>OpenLDAP</entry>
	<entry>2.4.23</entry>
	<entry>2.4.31</entry>
      </row>
      <row id="new-openssh">
	<entry>OpenSSH<indexterm><primary>OpenSSH</primary></indexterm></entry>
	<entry>5.5p1</entry>
	<entry>6.0p1</entry>
      </row>
      <row id="new-perl">
	<entry>Perl<indexterm><primary>Perl</primary></indexterm></entry>
	<entry>5.10</entry>
	<entry>5.14</entry>
      </row>
      <row id="new-php">
	<entry>PHP<indexterm><primary>PHP</primary></indexterm></entry>
	<entry>5.3</entry>
	<entry>5.4</entry>
      </row>
      <row id="new-postfix">
	<entry>Postfix<indexterm><primary>Postfix</primary></indexterm> <acronym>MTA</acronym></entry>
	<entry>2.7</entry>
	<entry>2.9</entry>
      </row>
      <row id="new-postgresql">
	<entry>PostgreSQL<indexterm><primary>PostgreSQL</primary></indexterm></entry>
	<entry>8.4</entry>
	<entry>9.1</entry>
      </row>
      <row id="new-python">
	<entry>Python</entry>
	<entry>2.6</entry>
	<entry>2.7</entry>
      </row>
      <row id="new-python3">
	<entry>Python 3</entry>
	<entry>3.1</entry>
	<entry>3.2</entry>
      </row>
      <row id="new-samba">
	<entry>Samba</entry>
	<entry>3.5</entry>
	<entry>3.6</entry>
      </row>
    </tbody>
  </tgroup>
</informaltable>

<programlisting condition="fixme">
 TODO: (JFS) List other server software? RADIUS? Streaming ?
</programlisting>

<para>
Debian supports Linux Standard Base (<acronym>LSB</acronym>) version 4.1,
with one explicit and Debian-specific derogation from the
<acronym>LSB</acronym> 4.1 specification: Qt3 is not included.
<indexterm><primary>Linux Standard Base</primary></indexterm>
</para>

<section id="cd" condition="fixme">
<title>CDs, DVDs and BDs</title>
<para>
The official &debian; distribution now ships on 7 to 8 binary
<acronym>DVD</acronym>s <indexterm><primary>DVD</primary></indexterm>
or 44 to 53 binary <acronym>CD</acronym>s
<indexterm><primary>CD</primary></indexterm> (depending on the
architecture) and 6 source <acronym>DVD</acronym>s or 33 source
<acronym>CD</acronym>s. Additionally, there is a
<emphasis>multi-arch</emphasis> <acronym>DVD</acronym>, with a subset
of the release for the <literal>amd64</literal> and
<literal>i386</literal> architectures, along with the source
code. &debian; is also released as Blu-ray
<indexterm><primary>Blu-ray</primary></indexterm>
(<acronym>BD</acronym>) images, 2 each for the
<literal>amd64</literal> and <literal>i386</literal> architectures, or
one for the source code. For size reasons, some very large packages
are omitted from the <acronym>CD</acronym> builds; these packages fit
better in the <acronym>DVD</acronym> and <acronym>BD</acronym> builds,
so are still included there.
</para>
<para>
A new feature with squeeze is the addition of
isohybrid<indexterm><primary>isohybrid</primary></indexterm> support to the
<literal>i386</literal> and <literal>amd64</literal>
<acronym>CD</acronym>s, <acronym>DVD</acronym>s and
<acronym>BD</acronym>s. To make a USB stick bootable with one of these
images used to mean following some extra procedures after downloading
the image; instead, now all that is required is to simply write the
image directly to the USB stick. For more information please see the
<quote>Preparing Files for USB Memory Stick Booting</quote> section in
the <ulink url="&url-install-manual;">Installation Guide</ulink>.
</para>
</section>

<!-- FIXME: REVIEW for wheezy -->
<section id="pkgmgmt">
<title>Package management</title>
<para>
The preferred program for interactive package management from a terminal is
<command>aptitude</command>. For a non-interactive command line interface
for package management, it is recommended to use <command>apt-get</command>.
<command>apt-get</command> is also the preferred tool for upgrades
between major releases.
</para>

<programlisting condition="fixme">
TODO: Do we have to mention dpkg triggers here or elsewhere?
</programlisting>

</section>

<section id="multiarch">
<title>Multiarch</title>
<para>
New in &debian; &release; is <emphasis>multiarch</emphasis>. Multiarch lets you install packages from
multiple architectures on the same machine. This is useful in various ways,
but the most common is installing both 64 and 32-bit software on the same
machine and having dependencies correctly resolved automatically. The
&debian; wiki has
<ulink url="http://wiki.debian.org/Multiarch/HOWTO">an extensive manual</ulink>
on how to make use of this functionality if you need it.
</para>

<para arch="amd64">
The <systemitem role="package">ia32-libs</systemitem> package is now a
transitional package which employs the new multiarch functionality.
If you have <systemitem role="package">ia32-libs</systemitem>
installed, see the <xref linkend="ia32libs"/>
on special steps to take.
</para>
</section>


<!-- TODO: in wheezy dependency boot is mandatory(?) -->
<section id="dependency-boot" condition="fixme">
<title>Dependency booting</title>

<para>
An important improvement in the &debian; boot system is the introduction
of dependency-based boot sequencing and parallel boot. This feature is enabled
by default in new installs and it will be enabled for upgrades from
&oldreleasename;, if possible.
</para>

<para>
This feature is enabled through the use of <systemitem role="package">insserv</systemitem> 
by sysv-rc  to order init.d scripts based on their declared
dependencies<footnote><para>These dependences are declared through the use of
the header format specified in the Linux Standard Base (LSB)</para></footnote>.
It has been possible after a sustained effort to adapt all the boot scripts
of packages provided in the distribution as well as the boot system itself.
</para>

<para>
With dependency-based boot sequencing it is also now possible to run the boot
system scripts in parallel which can, under most circumstances, improve the
speed of the boot process. This feature is enabled by default, in new
systems and upgrades, whenever possible.
To disable it specify <programlisting>CONCURRENCY=none</programlisting>
in <filename>/etc/default/rcS</filename>.
For more information on this feature refer to the information available in
<filename>/usr/share/doc/insserv/README.Debian</filename>.
</para>

</section>

<section id="hardening">
  <title>Hardened security</title>
  <para>
  Many Debian packages have now been built with <systemitem role="package">gcc</systemitem>
  compiler hardening flags enabled. These flags enable various protections against
  security issues such as stack smashing, predictable locations of values in memory, etc.
  An effort has been made to ensure that as many packages as possible include these
  flags, especially focusing on those in the 'base'-installation, network-accessible
  daemons and packages which have had security issues in recent years.
  </para>

  <para>Note that the hardened build flags are not enabled by default in
  <systemitem role="package">gcc</systemitem>, so are not used automatically
  when locally building software. The package
  <systemitem role="package">hardening-wrapper</systemitem> can provide a
  <systemitem>gcc</systemitem> with these flags enabled.
  </para>
</section>

<section id="stable-updates">
  <title>The stable-updates section</title>
  <para>
    Some packages from <literal>proposed-updates</literal> may also be made
    available via the <literal>&releasename;-updates</literal> mechanism.
    This path will be used for updates which many users may wish to install
    on their systems before the next point release is made, such as updates
    to virus scanners and timezone data. All packages from
    <literal>&releasename;-updates</literal> will be included in point
    releases.
  </para>
  <para>
    Note that this replaces the functionality previously provided by the
    <ulink url="http://volatile.debian.org/">volatile.debian.org archive</ulink>.
  </para>
  <para>
    In order to use packages from <literal>&releasename;-updates</literal>,
    you can add an entry to your <filename>sources.list</filename>:
  </para>
  <programlisting>deb     &url-debian-mirror-eg;/debian &releasename;-updates main contrib
deb-src &url-debian-mirror-eg;/debian &releasename;-updates main contrib</programlisting>
  <para>
    The next time you run <command>apt-get update</command>, the
    system will become aware of the packages in the
    <literal>&releasename;-updates</literal> section and will consider them
    when looking for packages to upgrade.
  </para>
  <para>
    When a new package is made available via <literal>&releasename;-updates</literal>,
    this will be announced on the <ulink
    url="http://lists.debian.org/debian-stable-announce/">debian-stable-announce</ulink> mailing list.
  </para>

</section>

<section>
  <title>GNOME 3</title>

  <para>
    GNOME has undergone a major interface rewrite in the upgrade to version
    3.4. The traditional GNOME panel has been replaced by the
    <quote>shell</quote>, an innovative interface with major usability
    improvements.
  </para>
  <para>
    Among other things, it features dynamic workspaces, an on-screen keyboard
    (Caribou), instant messaging built into the interface, and integration with
    the GNOME keyring and PolicyKit.
  </para>
  <para>
    If you want to keep an interface closer to the GNOME 2.30 version in
    wheezy, you can select the <quote>GNOME Classic</quote> session at the
    login prompt. It will bring you an improved version of the traditional
    panel. You can still edit the panel to add more applets, by using the
    hidden alt+right click combination.
  </para>
  <para>
    If your hardware is not compatible with the GNOME shell's requirements, you
    will also be redirected to the <quote>classic</quote> interface.
  </para>

  <section>
    <title>New and removed applications</title>

    <para>
      Sushi is a new previewing application. Just press the space key on a file
      in the file manager, and enjoy.
    </para>
    <para>
      The Tracker indexation tool is now part of the GNOME desktop.  After your
      first login, it will index your desktop, and is now available as the
      default search tool. It is also the key to the new GNOME documents tool
      to manage your recently used documents.
    </para>
    <para>
      Audio and mixing applications now require the PulseAudio sound daemon,
      which provides per-application mixing.
    </para>
    <para>
      The help system has been entirely redesigned, with a new documentation
      format.
    </para>
    <para>
      GNOME boxes is a tool to handle your virtual machines, integrated to the
      shell and using QEMU/KVM.
    </para>
    <para>
      Some other new applications: GNOME contacts, GNOME online accounts, GNOME
      PackageKit, GNOME color manager, Rygel.
    </para>
    <para>
      Ekiga is no longer part of GNOME. Many of its features are now available
      in Empathy.
    </para>
  </section>
  <section>
    <title>Settings</title>
    <para>
      Most technologies underlying GNOME are still here: the D-Bus messaging
      system, the PolicyKit permissions manager, the GStreamer multimedia
      system, the gvfs virtual file system, the MIME system, the ConsoleKit,
      udisks and upower interfaces to hardware management: all are kept without
      major changes.
    </para>
    <para>
      However, the underlying configuration system to GNOME has undergone a
      major evolution, from GConf to a new system named GSettings, which is
      much faster and more versatile. The settings can be browsed or edited
      using the (recommended) gsettings command-line tool, or the dconf-editor
      graphical tool.  The GConf system is still available for third-party
      applications that use it.
    </para>
    <para>
      Most settings are migrated upon upgrade, but for technical and conceptual
      reasons, a selected number of settings are not:
      <itemizedlist>
	<listitem>
	  <para>
	    default session and language (now managed by the accountsservice
	    daemon);
	  </para>
	</listitem>
	<listitem>
	  <para>
	    desktop wallpaper;
	  </para>
	</listitem>
	<listitem>
	  <para>
	    default GTK+ theme (none of the previous themes exist anymore);
	  </para>
	</listitem>
	<listitem>
	  <para>
	    panel and applets configuration (applets now use relative
	    positioning);
	  </para>
	</listitem>
	<listitem>
	  <para>
	    default browser and mailer (the settings are now part of the MIME
	    system through <literal>x-scheme-handler/*</literal> types).
	  </para>
	</listitem>
      </itemizedlist>
    </para>
  </section>
  <section>
    <title>Display manager</title>
    <para>
      The GNOME display manager (<systemitem role="package">gdm3</systemitem>)
      has undergone a major evolution together with the desktop. The primary
      change is that settings for the login prompt have been migrated to
      GSettings as well.  The configuration file has changed to
      greeter.gsettings and settings are not preserved. This only affects
      interface settings; daemon settings are still at the same place.
    </para>
    <para>
      The legacy GDM 2.20 package is no longer available; most of its former
      features are now available in GDM 3.x.
    </para>
  </section>
  <section>
    <title>Network management</title>
    <para>
      GNOME now features online connectivity awareness, with several
      applications and the GNOME shell using
      <command>NetworkManager</command>. This enables support for
      IPv6 and a wide range of other networking technologies, such as
      VPNs, wireless and 3G.
    </para>
    <para>
      GNOME users are strongly advised to use
      <command>NetworkManager</command> for network connectivity; the GNOME
      components work best with <command>NetworkManager</command>.
      If you are planning on using another network management daemon
      instead (such as <command>wicd-daemon</command>), please see Section
      <xref linkend="network-manager-conflicts"/>.
    </para>
  </section>
</section>

<section id="tmpfs-filesystems">
  <title>Temporary filesystems</title>
  <para>
    In previous releases, temporary (<literal>tmpfs</literal>) filesystems were
    mounted on <filename class='directory'>/lib/init/rw</filename>, <filename
    class='directory'>/dev/shm/</filename> and optionally on <filename
    class='directory'>/var/lock</filename> and <filename
    class='directory'>/var/run</filename>.  <filename
    class='directory'>/lib/init/rw</filename> has been removed, and the others
    have been moved under <filename class='directory'>/run</filename>. <filename
    class='directory'>/var/run</filename> and <filename
    class='directory'>/var/lock</filename> were configured using
    <literal>RAMRUN</literal> and <literal>RAMLOCK</literal> in
    <filename>/etc/default/rcS</filename>.  All <literal>tmpfs</literal>
    filesystems are now configurable using <filename>/etc/default/tmpfs</filename>;
    the old settings are not migrated automatically.
  </para>

<informaltable pgwide="1">
  <tgroup cols="4">
    <colspec align="justify"/>
    <colspec align="justify"/>
    <colspec align="justify"/>
    <colspec align="justify"/>
    <!-- colspec align="justify" colwidth="3*"/ -->
    <thead>
      <row>
        <entry>Old location</entry>
        <entry>New location</entry>
        <entry>Old setting</entry>
        <entry>New setting</entry>
      </row>
    </thead>
    <tbody>
      <row>
        <entry></entry>
        <entry></entry>
        <entry><filename class='directory'>/etc/default/rcS</filename></entry>
        <entry><filename class='directory'>/etc/default/tmpfs</filename></entry>
      </row>
      <row>
        <entry><filename class='directory'>/lib/init/rw</filename></entry>
        <entry><filename class='directory'>/run</filename></entry>
        <entry>N/A</entry>
        <entry>N/A</entry>
      </row>
      <row>
        <entry><filename class='directory'>/var/run</filename></entry>
        <entry><filename class='directory'>/run</filename></entry>
        <entry><literal>RAMRUN</literal></entry>
        <entry>N/A</entry>
      </row>
      <row>
        <entry><filename class='directory'>/var/lock</filename></entry>
        <entry><filename class='directory'>/run/lock</filename></entry>
        <entry><literal>RAMLOCK</literal></entry>
        <entry><literal>RAMLOCK</literal></entry>
      </row>
      <row>
        <entry><filename class='directory'>/dev/shm</filename></entry>
        <entry><filename class='directory'>/run/shm</filename></entry>
        <entry>N/A</entry>
        <entry><literal>RAMSHM</literal></entry>
      </row>
      <row>
        <entry>N/A</entry>
        <entry><filename class='directory'>/tmp</filename></entry>
        <entry><literal></literal>N/A</entry>
        <entry><literal>RAMTMP</literal></entry>
      </row>
    </tbody>
  </tgroup>
</informaltable>

  <para>
    The migration of data to the new locations will occur automatically during
    the upgrade and will continue to be available at the old and new locations,
    with the exception of <filename class='directory'>/lib/init/rw</filename>.
    No action is required on your part, though you may wish to customise which
    <literal>tmpfs</literal> filesystems are mounted, and their size limits, in
    <filename>/etc/default/tmpfs</filename> after the upgrade is complete.
    Please see the tmpfs(5) manual page for further details.
  </para>
  
  <para>
    If you have written any custom scripts which make use of
    <filename class='directory'>/lib/init/rw</filename>, these must be updated
    to use <filename class='directory'>/run</filename> instead.
  </para>
  
  <para>
    <filename class='directory'>/tmp</filename> is not a <literal>tmpfs</literal>
    by default.  If you chose to use this feature, please note that:
    <itemizedlist>
      <listitem>
        <para>
          the contents of <filename class='directory'>/tmp</filename> are not
          preserved across reboots;
          <filename class='directory'>/var/tmp</filename> exists for this
          purpose;
        </para>
      </listitem>
      <listitem>
        <para>
          the maximum size of <filename class='directory'>/tmp</filename> may
          (depending upon your specific system) be smaller than before.  If you
          find that there is insufficient free space, it is possible to increase
          the size limits; see tmpfs(5).
        </para>
      </listitem>
      <listitem>
        <para>
          Applications which create excessively large temporary files may cause
          <filename class='directory'>/tmp</filename> to run out of free space.
          It should be possible to configure a different location for those
          files by setting the <literal>TMPDIR</literal> environment variable.
        </para>
      </listitem>
      <listitem>
        <para>
          If desired, the defaults may also be overridden with an entry in in
          <filename>/etc/fstab</filename>, for example:<programlisting>
tmpfs     /tmp tmpfs     nodev,nosuid,size=20%,mode=1777    0    0
</programlisting>
        </para>
      </listitem>
    </itemizedlist>
  </para>

</section>

</section>

</chapter>
